# Alaska State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• ALASKA ADMIN. CODE tit. 5. §92.029 - PERMIT FOR POSSESSING LIVE GAME.

(a) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, or in AS 16, no person may
possess, import, release, export, or assist in importing, releasing, or
exporting, live game, unless the person holds a possession permit issued by
the department.

(b) The following species, not including a hybrid of a game animal and a
species listed in this subsection, may be possessed, imported, exported,
bought, sold, or traded without a permit from the department but may not be
released into the wild:

**Common Name**
**Scientific Name**

Chimpanzee

_Pan_ spp.

Dog

_Canis familiaris_

Cat

_Felis catus_

Sheep

_Ovis aries_

Goat

_Capra hircus_

Cattle

_Bos taurus_

Oxen

_Bos_ spp.

Horse

_Equus caballus_

Guinea pig

_Cavia porcellus_

Reindeer (except feral reindeer)

_Rangifer tarandus_ Var.

Llama

_Lama peruana_

Alpaca

_Lama pacos_

One-humped camel

_Camelus dromedarius_

Ass

_Equus asinus_ Var.

Mule

_Equus asinus x caballus_

Swine

_Sus scrofa_ Var.

European ferret

_Mustela putorius furo_

European rabbit

_Oryctolagus cuniculus_ Var.

White rat

_Rattus norvegicus_ Var. _albinus_

Mice: white, waltzing, singing,

_Mus musculus_ Var. shaker, piebald

Fat-tailed gerbil

_Pachyuromys_

Gerbil

_Gerbillus_ spp.

Hamster (golden)

_Mesocricetus auratus_

Chinchilla

_Chinchilla laniger_

Cavy

_Cavia apera_

Hedgehog, African Pygmy

_Erinaceus albiventris_

Chicken

_Gallus gallus_ Var.

Pigeon

_Columbia livea_ Var.

Any Turkey species

Subfamily _Meleagridinae_

Any Pheasant, Junglefowl or _Coturnix_ species

Subfamily _Phasianinae_

Any Guineafowl species

Subfamily _Numidinae_

Canary

_Serinus canaria_ Var.

Parrot, parakeet, cockatiel, macaw, and other members of the Family
_Psittacidae_ not prohibited by federal or international law

Family _Psittacidae_

Toucan

Family _Ramphastidae_

Any New World Quail species (including Bobwhite)

Subfamily _Odontophorinae_

Mynah

_Acridotheres_ spp.

Any Peafowl species

_Pavo_ spp.

Any duck, goose, swan, or other migratory waterfowl which the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service determines does not require a federal permit for private
ownership

Chukar partridge

_Alectoris chukar_

Button "quail"

Family _Turnicidae_ in the order _Gruiformes_

Any nonvenomous reptile (crocodile, alligator, snake, turtle, or lizard)

Class _Reptilia_

Members of the bird families _Fringillidae_, _ Turdidae_, Zoster ipidae,
Pycnonotidae, Timaliidae, and _Ploceidae_ of non-Holarctic origin.

Members of the bird families _Columbidae_ and _ Trogonidae_ of non-nearctic
origin.

(c) The department may not issue a permit for the capture, possession, import,
or export of any game animal, including a hybrid of a game animal and a
species listed in (b) of this section, for use as a pet.

(d) Under this section, and in accordance with the definition of "game" in AS
16.05.940 (which includes feral domestic animals), a

> (1) European ferret (_Mustela putorius furo_), swine (_Sus scrofa Var._), or
nonindigenous gallinaceous bird is feral if the animal is not under direct
control of the owner, including being confined in a cage or other physical
structure, or being restrained on a leash; the commissioner may capture,
destroy, or dispose of any feral ferret, feral swine, or feral nonindigenous
gallinaceous bird in an appropriate manner;

>

> (2) musk oxen, bison, or reindeer that is lawfully owned, or an elk held
under a valid game mammal farming license, that is not confined or is not
under positive control is feral unless the animal is a free-ranging animal
under a state or federal grazing lease; however,

>

>> (A) a person who can demonstrate ownership of the animal may pursue and
capture the animal within 48 hours after the animal escapes from confinement,
without needing to obtain a permit from the department;

>>

>> (B) a person who can demonstrate ownership of the animal may pursue and
capture the animal more than 48 hours after the animal escapes from
confinement only if the person obtains a permit from the department;

>>

>> (C) any free-ranging musk oxen, bison, reindeer, or elk for which ownership
cannot be demonstrated is presumed to be game;

>>

>> (D) for purposes of this paragraph, ownership of an animal can be
demonstrated only by means of a clearly visible permanent brand, ear tag, or
owner's mark on the body of the animal.

(e) Any of the above species of bird, mammal, or reptile that is endangered
may not be held in private ownership without a permit from the United States
Fish and Wildlife Service.

(f) Notwithstanding (b) of this section, the following species may be
temporarily released for the purpose of hunting dog or falcon training, field
trials, and tests:

> (1) Pigeon (_Columbia livia_ Var.);

>

> (2) Pheasant, Jungle Fowl, or Coturnix (Subfamily _Phasianinae_);

>

> (3) any Guineafowl species (Subfamily _Numidinae_);

>

> (4) any New World Quail species (including _Colinus_) (Subfamily
_Odontophorinae_);

>

> (5) any duck, goose, swan, or other migratory waterfowl which the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service has determined does not require a federal permit for
private ownership;

>

> (6) Chukar Partridge (_Alectoris chukar_).

(g) A person using live game listed in (f) of this section for the purpose of
hunting dog or falcon training, field trials, or tests

> (1) may release the game only on the day of use and shall make reasonable
efforts to capture, kill, or recover the temporarily released live game;

>

> (2) may take the live game in connection with hunting dog or falcon
training, field trial, and test activities; and

>

> (3) must legally acquire, hold, and dispose of the live game in accordance
with all other applicable state statutes and regulations.

(h) Upon application, the board will add a species to the list in (b) of this
section if there is clear and convincing evidence that the species

> (1) is not capable of surviving in the wild in Alaska;

>

> (2) is not capable of causing a genetic alteration of a species that is
indigenous to Alaska;

>

> (3) is not capable of causing a significant reduction in the population of a
species that is indigenous to Alaska;

>

> (4) is not capable of transmitting a disease to a species that is indigenous
to Alaska; and

>

> (5) does not otherwise present a threat to the health or population of a
species that is indigenous to Alaska.

(i) The board will remove a species from the list in (b) of this section, if
there is a preponderance of evidence that the species

> (1) is capable of surviving in the wild in Alaska;

>

> (2) is capable of causing a genetic alteration of a species that is
indigenous to Alaska;

>

> (3) is capable of causing a significant reduction in the population of a
species that is indigenous to Alaska;

>

> (4) is capable of transmitting a disease to a species that is indigenous to
Alaska; or

>

> (5) otherwise presents a threat to the health or population of a species
that is indigenous to Alaska.

* * *

• ALASKA STAT. §16.05.940 - Definitions.

In AS 16.05 - AS 16.40

(1) "aquatic plant" means any species of plant, excluding the rushes, sedges
and true grasses, growing in a marine aquatic or intertidal habitat;

(2) "barter" means the exchange or trade of fish or game, or their parts,
taken for subsistence uses

> (A) for other fish or game or their parts; or

>

> (B) for other food or for nonedible items other than money if the exchange
is of a limited and noncommercial nature;

(3) "a board" means either the Board of Fisheries or the Board of Game;

(4) "commercial fisherman" means an individual who fishes commercially for,
takes, or attempts to take fish, shellfish, or other fishery resources of the
state by any means, and includes every individual aboard a boat operated for
fishing purposes who participates directly or indirectly in the taking of
these raw fishery products, whether participation is on shares or as an
employee or otherwise; however, this definition does not apply to anyone
aboard a licensed vessel as a visitor or guest who does not directly or
indirectly participate in the taking; "commercial fisherman" includes the
crews of tenders or other floating craft used in transporting fish, but does
not include processing workers on floating fish processing vessels who do not
operate fishing gear or engage in activities related to navigation or
operation of the vessel; in this paragraph "operate fishing gear" means to
deploy or remove gear from state water, remove fish from gear during an open
fishing season or period, or possess a gill net containing fish during an open
fishing period;

(5) "commercial fishing" means the taking, fishing for, or possession of fish,
shellfish, or other fishery resources with the intent of disposing of them for
profit, or by sale, barter, trade, or in commercial channels; the failure to
have a valid subsistence permit in possession, if required by statute or
regulation, is considered prima facie evidence of commercial fishing if
commercial fishing gear as specified by regulation is involved in the taking,
fishing for, or possession of fish, shellfish, or other fish resources;

(6) "commissioner" means the commissioner of fish and game unless specifically
provided otherwise;

(7) "customary and traditional" means the noncommercial, long-term, and
consistent taking of, use of, and reliance upon fish or game in a specific
area and the use patterns of that fish or game that have been established over
a reasonable period of time taking into consideration the availability of the
fish or game;

(8) "customary trade" means the limited noncommercial exchange, for minimal
amounts of cash, as restricted by the appropriate board, of fish or game
resources; the terms of this paragraph do not restrict money sales of furs and
furbearers.

(9) "department" means the Department of Fish and Game unless specifically
provided otherwise;

(10) "domestic mammals" include musk oxen, bison, and reindeer, if they are
lawfully owned;

(11) "domicile" means the true and permanent home of a person from which the
person has no present intention of moving and to which the person intends to
return whenever the person is away; domicile may be proved by presenting
evidence acceptable to the boards of fisheries and game;

(12) "fish" means any species of aquatic finfish, invertebrate, or amphibian,
in any stage of its life cycle, found in or introduced into the state, and
includes any part of such aquatic finfish, invertebrate, or amphibian;

(13) "fish derby" means a contest in which prizes are awarded for catching
fish;

(14) "fishery" means a specific administrative area in which a specific
fishery resource is taken with a specific type of gear; however, the Board of
Fisheries may designate a fishery to include more than one specific
administrative area, type of gear, or fishery resource; in this paragraph

> (A) "gear" means the specific apparatus used in the harvest of a fishery
resource; and

>

> (B) "type of gear" means an identifiable classification of gear and may
include

>

>> (i) classifications for which separate regulations are adopted by the Board
of Fisheries or for which separate gear licenses were required by former AS
16.05.550 - 16.05.630; and

>>

>> (ii) distinct subclassifications of gear such as "power" troll gear and
"hand" troll gear or sport gear and guided sport gear;

(15) "fish or game farming" means the business of propagating, breeding,
raising, or producing fish or game in captivity for the purpose of marketing
the fish or game or their products, and "captivity" means having the fish or
game under positive control, as in a pen, pond, or an area of land or water
that is completely enclosed by a generally escape-proof barrier; in this
paragraph, "fish" does not include shellfish, as defined in AS 16.40.199;

(16) "fish stock" means a species, subspecies, geographic grouping or other
category of fish manageable as a unit;

(17) "fur dealing" means engaging in the business of buying, selling, or
trading in animal skins, but does not include the sale of animal skins by a
trapper or hunter who has legally taken the animal, or the purchase of animal
skins by a person, other than a fur dealer, for the person's own use;

(18) "game" means any species of bird, reptile, and mammal, including a feral
domestic animal, found or introduced in the state, except domestic birds and
mammals; and game may be classified by regulation as big game, small game, fur
bearers or other categories considered essential for carrying out the
intention and purposes of AS 16.05 - AS 16.40;

(19) "game population" means a group of game animals of a single species or
subgroup manageable as a unit;

(20) "hunting" means the taking of game under AS 16.05 - AS 16.40 and the
regulations adopted under those chapters;

(21) "nonresident" means a person who is not a resident of the state;

(22) "nonresident alien" means a person who is not a citizen of the United
States and whose permanent place of abode is not in the United States;

(23) "operator" means the individual by law made responsible for the operation
of the vessel;

(24) "personal use fishing" means the taking, fishing for, or possession of
finfish, shellfish, or other fishery resources, by Alaska residents for
personal use and not for sale or barter, with gill or dip net, seine, fish
wheel, long line, or other means defined by the Board of Fisheries;

(25) "person with physical disabilities" means a person who presents to the
department either written proof that the person receives at least 70 percent
disability compensation from a government agency for a physical disability or
an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice medicine in the state
stating that the person is at least 70 percent physically disabled;

(26) "resident" means

> (A) a person who for the 12 consecutive months immediately preceding the
time when the assertion of residence is made has maintained the person's
domicile in the state and who is neither claiming residency in another state,
territory, or country nor obtaining benefits under a claim of residency in
another state, territory, or country;

>

> (B) a partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, or corporation
that has its main office or headquarters in the state; a natural person who
does not otherwise qualify as a resident under this paragraph may not qualify
as a resident by virtue of an interest in a partnership, association, joint
stock company, trust, or corporation;

>

> (C) a member of the military service, or United States Coast Guard, who has
been stationed in the state for the 12 consecutive months immediately
preceding the time when the assertion of residence is made;

>

> (D) a person who is the dependent of a resident member of the military
service, or the United States Coast Guard, and who has lived in the state for
the 12 consecutive months immediately preceding the time when the assertion of
residence is made; or

>

> (E) an alien who for the 12 consecutive months immediately preceding the
time when the assertion of residence is made has maintained the person's
domicile in the state and who is neither claiming residency in another state,
territory, or country nor obtaining benefits under a claim of residency in
another state, territory, or country;

(27) "rural area" means a community or area of the state in which the
noncommercial, customary, and traditional use of fish or game for personal or
family consumption is a principal characteristic of the economy of the
community or area;

(28) "seizure" means the actual or constructive taking or possession of real
or personal property subject to seizure under AS 16.05 - AS 16.40 by an
enforcement or investigative officer charged with enforcement of the fish and
game laws of the state;

(29) "sport fishing" means the taking of or attempting to take for personal
use, and not for sale or barter, any fresh water, marine, or anadromous fish
by hook and line held in the hand, or by hook and line with the line attached
to a pole or rod which is held in the hand or closely attended, or by other
means defined by the Board of Fisheries;

(30) "subsistence fishing" means the taking of, fishing for, or possession of
fish, shellfish, or other fisheries resources by a resident domiciled in a
rural area of the state for subsistence uses with gill net, seine, fish wheel,
long line, or other means defined by the Board of Fisheries;

(31) "subsistence hunting" means the taking of, hunting for, or possession of
game by a resident domiciled in a rural area of the state for subsistence uses
by means defined by the Board of Game;

(32) "subsistence uses" means the noncommercial, customary and traditional
uses of wild, renewable resources by a resident domiciled in a rural area of
the state for direct personal or family consumption as food, shelter, fuel,
clothing, tools, or transportation, for the making and selling of handicraft
articles out of nonedible by-products of fish and wildlife resources taken for
personal or family consumption, and for the customary trade, barter, or
sharing for personal or family consumption; in this paragraph, "family" means
persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, and a person living in the
household on a permanent basis;

(33) "take" means taking, pursuing, hunting, fishing, trapping, or in any
manner disturbing, capturing, or killing or attempting to take, pursue, hunt,
fish, trap, or in any manner capture or kill fish or game;

(34) "taxidermy" means tanning, mounting, processing, or other treatment or
preparation of fish or game, or any part of fish or game, as a trophy, for
monetary gain, including the receiving of the fish or game or parts of fish or
game for such purposes;

(35) "trapping" means the taking of mammals declared by regulation to be fur
bearers;

(36) "vessel" means a floating craft powered, towed, rowed, or otherwise
propelled, which is used for delivering, landing, or taking fish within the
jurisdiction of the state, but does not include aircraft.

* * *

• ALASKA STAT. §92.030 - POSSESSION OF WOLF HYBRID PROHIBITED.

(1) It is unlawful, without a permit issued by the department, for a person to
possess, transport, sell, advertise or otherwise offer for sale, purchase, or
offer to purchase a wolf hybrid.

(2) It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution for illegal possession of a
wolf hybrid under this section that

> (A) the person possessed the wolf hybrid as a pet before January 23, 2002;

>

> (B) by July 1, 2002, the wolf hybrid is

>

>> (i) registered with a national registry, approved by the department, by the
implantation of a microchip; and

>>

>> (ii) properly spayed or neutered;

>>

>> (iii) the owner of the wolf hybrid has current and accurate licensing,
vaccination, including rabies vaccination, and spay/neuter records, and has
made the records available for inspection by animal control officers and other
enforcement officers;

>>

>> (iv) beginning Jan. 23, 2002, the wolf hybrid has not been transferred to
any person, other than an immediate family member of the person who owned the
wolf hybrid on Jan. 23, 2002; and

>>

>> (v) if the wolf hybrid has bitten a person, the wolf hybrid is immediately
surrendered to the local authorities for any action determined appropriate by
the authorities.

(3) For purposes of this section,

> (A) "immediate family member" has the meaning given in AS 39.52.960;

>

> (B) "wolf hybrid" includes

>

>> (i) the offspring from a mating of a wolf or wolf hybrid with a dog or
another wolf hybrid; and

>>

>> (ii) an animal represented to be a wolf or part wolf by any name or
description.