# Alabama State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

â€¢ ALA. ADMIN CODE r. 220-2-.26 -- _ Restrictions On Possession, Sale,
Importation And/Or Release of Certain Animals And Fish_.

(1) No person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association shall possess,
sell, offer for sale, import, bring or cause to be brought or imported into
the State of Alabama any of the following live fish or animals:

> Any Walking Catfish or any other fish of the genus _Clarias_

>

> Any Piranha or any fish of the genus _Serrasalmus_

>

> Any Black Carp of the genus _Mylopharyngodon_

>

> Any species of Mongoose

>

> San Juan Rabbits, Jack Rabbits or any other species of wild rabbit or hare

>

> Any member of the family Cervidae (to include but not be limited to deer,
elk, moose, caribou), species of coyote, species of fox, species of raccoon,
species of skunk, wild rodent, or strain of wild turkey, from any area outside
the state of Alabama.

(2) It shall be unlawful to release any tame turkey, or any other turkey,
whether wild or tame, into any of the wild areas of this State. The provisions
of this regulation shall not apply to any turkeys kept by any farmer or
landowner of this State for normal agricultural purposes or for personal
consumption. The provisions of this regulation shall not apply to any properly
licensed circus or recognized zoos when such fish or animals are owned by such
circuses or zoos for the purpose of display of same to the public.

(3) Nutria shall not be propagated or released in this State. No person, firm
or corporation shall release any Nutria from captivity in this State or
propagate any Nutria for the purpose of stocking in the wild of this State.

(4) All species of sturgeon are hereby declared to be protected fish within
this State and any person who shall catch a sturgeon shall immediately return
it to the waters from whence it came with the least possible harm.

(5) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to possess a
species of sturgeon not native to Alabama waters, to introduce such a species
of sturgeon to public waters of Alabama, or to offer for sale or import any
such non-native sturgeon in Alabama, except by permit from the Commissioner of
the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.

(6) It shall be unlawful to possess, sell, offer for sale, import, or release
any of the following fish: Siniperca spp., Channa maculuta, or Chirrhinus
molitonella.

(7) It shall be unlawful for any person to have in possession any live,
protected wild bird or wild animal, except by written permission of a
designated employee of the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources
authorized by the Director of the Game and Fish Division to issue such
permits.