# Arkansas State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• ARK. CODE ANN. §20-19-501. Definitions

As used in this subchapter:

(1) "Large carnivore" means any live individual of those species of animals
that are inherently dangerous to humans, including:

> (A) Tigers;

>

> (B) Lions; and

>

> (G) [_sic_] All bears.

(2) "Possessor" means a person who owns, keeps, or has custody or control of a
large carnivore; and

(3)(A) "Wildlife sanctuary" means a nonprofit organization under § 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code as it existed that operates a place of refuge
where abused, neglected, unwanted, impounded, abandoned, orphaned or displaced
large carnivores are provided care for their lifetime; and

> (B) "Wild life" sanctuary does not mean a place that:

>

>> (i) Conducts any activity that is not inherent to the large carnivor's
[_sic_] nature;

>>

>> (ii) Uses the large carnivore for any type of entertainment;

>>

>> (iii) Sells, trades, or barters the large carnivore or the large
carnivore's body parts; or

>>

>> (iv) Breeds the large carnivore for purposes of sale.

* * *

• ARK. CODE ANN. §20-19-502. Prohibited acts

(a) Except as permitted under this subchapter, it is unlawful for a person to:

> (1) Own or possess a large carnivore;

>

> (2) Breed a large carnivore; or

>

> (3) Transfer ownership or possession of, or receive a transfer of ownership
or possession of a large carnivore, with or without remuneration.

(b) Except as permitted under this subchapter, it is unlawful for a person or
other entity in control of any property, residence, or business premises to
knowingly permit any other person to be in possession of a large carnivore
upon the property, residence, or business premises.

* * *

• ARK. CODE ANN. §20-19-503. Exemptions

This subchapter does not apply to:

> (1) Institutions accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium Association;

>

> (2) Registered nonprofit humane societies;

>

> (3) Animal control officers or law enforcement officers acting under the
authority of this subchapter;

>

> (4) Veterinary hospitals or clinics;

>

> (5) A person or organization with a U.S. Department of Agriculture Wildlife
Exhibition permit;

>

> (6) Employees of the Arkansas State Game and Fish Commission in the
performance of their duties;

>

> (7) Those persons holding a valid Arkansas State Game and Fish Commission
scientific collection permit applicable to a large carnivore; or

>

> (8) Persons or organizations with and Arkansas Game and Fish Commission
Wildlife Breeder/Dealer permit.

* * *

• ARK. CODE ANN. §20-19-504. Permit for personal possession

(a) A person may possess a large carnivore only if:

> (1) The person was in possession of the large carnivore and was the legal
possessor of the large carnivore on or before the effective date of this
subchapter; and

>

> (2) The person applies for and is granted a permit for personal possession
for each large carnivore in the person's possession not more than one hundred
and eighty (180) days after the effective date of this subchapter.

(b)(1) A person under subsection (a) of this section shall annually obtain a
permit for personal possession.

> (2) After the effective date of this subchapter, any additional large
carnivore shall not be brought into possession under the authority of a permit
for personal possession.

(c)(1) An applicant shall file an application to receive a permit for personal
possession with the county sheriff's department of the county where the large
carnivore is kept on forms provided by the sheriff's department.

> (2) The application shall include:

>

>> (A) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;

>>

>> (B) A description of each large carnivore, including the scientific
classification, name, sex, age, color, weight, and distinguishing marks or
coloration that would aid in the identification of the animal;

>>

>> (C) A photograph of the large carnivore;

>>

>> (D) The location where the large carnivore is kept; and

>>

>> (E) The name, address, and telephone number of the person from whom the
applicant obtained the large carnivore, if known.

>

> (3) The application shall be signed by the veterinarian who is expected to
provide veterinary care to the large carnivore and shall have the
veterinarian's name, address, telephone number.

(d) The county sheriff's department shall not grant a permit unless:

> (1) An annual permit fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250) for each large
carnivore accompanies the application;

>

> (2) The applicant is eighteen (18) years of age or older;

>

> (3) The applicant has not been found guilty or pled nolo contendere or
guilty to any animal cruelty violations in the past ten (10) years or to a
felony offense for possession, sale, or use of illegal narcotics in the past
ten (10) years;

>

> (4) The facility and the conditions in which the large carnivore is kept
comply with this subchapter; and

>

> (5) The applicant has obtained the liability insurance coverage for the
large carnivore as required under this subchapter.

(e)(1) The county sheriff's department shall keep records of persons issued a
valid permit for personal possession of a large carnivore and provide the
copies of the records to the Arkansas Game and Fish Commission when each
permit is issued.

> (2) A permit holder shall notify the county sheriff's department of any
changes of the permit holder's information, including the death of the large
carnivore.

(f)(1) In addition to the other requirements for issuance of a permit for
personal possession, the large carnivore shall be spayed or neutered before a
permit is issued to the possessor unless a veterinarian confirms that spaying
and neutering would endanger the large carnivore.

> (2) A record of the large carnivore being spayed or neutered by a
veterinarian is to be kept on file by the permit holder.

(g) All fees levied and collected for permits of personal possession under
this section shall be deposited into the county treasury to be used by the
county sheriff's department to offset the cost of issuing permits of personal
possession, for any costs involved in controlling large carnivores located
within the county, and for any other animal control costs.

* * *

• ARK. CODE ANN. §20-19-505. Caging requirements

(a)(1) The possessor of a large carnivore is required to maintain the large
carnivore in a cage that meets the requirements recommended by the U. S.
Department of Agriculture or the American Zoo and Aquarium Association as in
existence on January 1, 2005, for each species of large carnivore.

> (2) Failure to provide the caging required by this section shall result in
the cancellation of the permit for personal possession.

(b) Deviations from these caging requirements may be approved by the county
sheriff of the county where the animal is kept upon showing of good cause.

* * *

• ARK. CODE ANN. §20-19-506. Insurance--Signs--Notification

(a)(1) A possessor of a large carnivore shall maintain liability insurance
coverage in an amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000)
for each occurrence for liability damages for destruction of or damage to
property and for death or bodily injury to a person caused by the large
carnivore.

> (2) The possessor of a large carnivore shall provide a copy of the policy
for liability insurance to the county sheriff's department on an annual basis
to obtain or renew a permit.

(b)(1) The possessor of a large carnivore shall post and display a sign at
each possible entrance onto the premises where a large carnivore is kept.

> (2) The sign shall be clearly legible and easily readable by the public.

>

> (3) The sign shall warn that there is a large carnivore on the premises.

* * *

• ARK. CODE ANN. §20-19-507. Inspection

The possessor of a large carnivore shall allow an official of the county
sheriff's department, an animal control officer, Arkansas Game and Fish
Commission wildlife officer, or a law enforcement officer of the municipality
or county where the animal is kept to enter the premises to ensure compliance
with this subchapter.

* * *

• ARK. CODE ANN. §20-19-508. Public contact--Warnings of escape

(a) The possessor of a large carnivore shall not bring a large carnivore to
any commercial or retail establishment unless the possessor is bringing the
large carnivore to a veterinarian clinic.

(b)(1) If a large carnivore escapes or is released, the possessor of the large
carnivore shall immediately contact the Arkansas State Game and Fish
Commission and law enforcement officials of the city or county where the
possessor resides to report the escape or release.

> (2) The possessor is liable for all expenses associated with efforts to
recapture the large carnivore.

(c) Persons or organization with a U.S. Department of Agriculture Wildlife
Exhibition permit may take the large carnivores to schools and other
exhibitions for educational or fundraising purposes.

* * *

• ARK. CODE ANN. §20-19-509. Confiscation

(a) A large carnivore may be immediately confiscated by a county sheriff's
department if:

> (1) The possessor does not have a permit for personal possession;

>

> (2) The possessor does not have the liability insurance coverage required
under this subchapter;

>

> (3) Conditions under which the large carnivore is kept are directly or
indirectly dangerous to human health and safety; or

>

> (4) The caging requirements of § 20-19-505 are not met.

(b)(1) If a large carnivore is confiscated, the possessor shall be liable for
the costs of placement and care for the large carnivore from the time of
confiscation until the time the large carnivore has been relocated to an
alternative facility.

> (2) The county sheriff's department shall seek to place the confiscated
large carnivore with a wildlife sanctuary, humane society, or an institution
accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium Association.

* * *

• ARK. CODE ANN. §20-19-510. Penalties

A person who is in violation of the prohibitions of § 20-19-502 is guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor.

* * *

• ARK. CODE ANN. §20-19-511. Rules and regulations

The county sheriff's department of each county may collect the fees for the
permits for personal possession required under this subchapter and the
Arkansas Game and Fish Commission may adopt rules and regulations to implement
and enforce this act.

* * *

• ARK. CODE ANN. §20-19-602. Prohibited activities

(a) A person shall not import, possess, sell, or breed the following primates:

> (1) An ape;

>

> (2) A baboon; or

>

> (3) A macaque.

(b)(1)(A) It is unlawful for a person to allow a member of the public to come
into direct contact with a primate.

> (B) Subdivision (b)(1)(A) of this section does not apply to a registered
primate owner, the family of a registered primate owner, an invited guest of a
registered primate owner.

>

> (2) If a primate potentially exposes a human to rabies or another zoonotic
disease by penetration or abrasion of the skin, the owner of the primate shall
report the potential exposure to the local public health office within twenty-
four (24) hours.

(c)(1) It is unlawful for a person to tether a primate outdoors, such as on a
leash or chain, or to allow a primate to run at-large.

> (2) If a primate escapes or is released, the owner of the primate
immediately shall contact a law enforcement officer in the county in which the
primate is kept and the Arkansas State Game and Fish Commission to report the
loss, escape, or release.

>

> (3) The owner of a primate that escapes or is released is liable for all
expenses associated with efforts to recapture the primate.

(d) It is unlawful to violate the caging and care standards in this subchapter
or to keep a primate in a manner that threatens animal welfare or public
safety.

(e) It is unlawful to operate a primate commercial breeding facility in this
state.

**[View Acrobat PDF (HB1391)](downloads/pdf/HB1391_AR_Exotics_Law.pdf) »**