# California State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

โข CAL. CODE REGS. Tit. 14 ยง671 -- Importation, Transportation and Possession
of Live Restricted Animals

(a) It shall be unlawful to import, transport, or possess alive animals
restricted in subsection (c) below except under permit issued by the
Department of Fish and Game. Permits may be issued by the department as
specified herein and for purposes designated in Section 671.1 subject to the
conditions and restrictions designated by the department. Except for mammals
listed in Fish and Game Code Section 3950 Fish & Game or live aquatic animals
requiring a permit pursuant to Fish and Game Code Section 2271 Fish & Game, no
permit is required by this section for any animal being imported, transported,
or possessed pursuant to any other permit issued by the department. Cities and
counties may also prohibit possession or require a permit for these and other
species not requiring a state permit.

(b) The commission has determined the below listed animals are not normally
domesticated in this state. Mammals listed to prevent the depletion of wild
populations and to provide for animal welfare are termed "welfare animals",
and are designated by the letter "W". Those species listed because they pose a
threat to native wildlife, the agriculture interests of the state or to public
health or safety are termed "detrimental animals" and are designated by the
letter "D". The department shall include the list of welfare and detrimental
wild animals as part of DFG MANUAL No. 671 (2/25/92) IMPORTATION,
TRANSPORTATION AND POSSESSION OF RESTRICTED SPECIES, to be made available to
all permittees and other interested individuals.

(c) Restricted species include:

(1) Class Aves - Birds

> (A) Family Alaudidae - Larks

>

>> _Alauda arvensis_ (Skylark) (D).

>

> (B) Family Cuculidae - Cuckoos

>

>> All species (D).

>

> (C) Family Corvidae - Crows, Ravens, Rooks, Jackdaws

>

>> All species (D).

>

> (D) Family Turdidae - Thrushes, Blackbirds, Fieldfare

>

>   1. _Turdus merula_ (European blackbird) (D).

>   2. _Turdus viscivorus_ (Missel thrush) (D).

>   3. _Turdus pilaris_ (Fieldfare) (D).

>   4. _Turdus musicus_ (Song thrush) (D).

>

> (E) Family Sturnidae -- Starlings, Mynahs All species (D), except _Sturnus
vulgaris_ (Starling), _Gracula religiosa_ or _Eulabes religiosa_ (Hill
mynahs), and _ Leucopsar rothschildi_ (Rothchild's mynah) are not restricted.

>

> (F) Family Ploceidae - Sparrows, Weavers, Queleas

>

>   1. Genus _Passer_ (Sparrow)  
All species (D), except _Passer domesticus_ (English house sparrow) is not
restricted.

>   2. _Foudia madagascariensis_ (Madagascar weaver) (D).

>   3. _Ploceus baya_ (Baya weaver) (D).

>   4. _Genus Quelea_ (Queleas) - All species (D).

>

> (G) Family Estrildidae - Waxbills, Munias, Ricebirds

>

>   1. _Padda oryzivora_ (Java sparrow) (D).

>

> (H) Family Emberizidae - Yellowhammer

>

>> _Emberiza citrinella_ (Yellowhammer) (D).

>

> (I) Order Falconiformes - Falcons, Eagles, Hawks, Vultures

>

>   1. Vultures All species (D)

>   2. Falcons, Eagles, Hawks (D)

>

> (J) Order Strigiformes - Owls All species (D)

>

> (K) Family Pyconotidae --

>

>> Bulbuls or Fruit Thrushes _Pycnonotus jocosus_

>>

>>> (Red-whiskered bulbul) (D).

>

> (L) Family Zosteropidae - Whiteeyes Genus _Zosterops_ (Whiteeyes) --

>

>> All species (D).

>

> (M) Family Psittacidae --

>

>> Parrots, Parakeets _Myiopsitta monachu_s (Monk or Quaker parakeet) (D).

(2) Class Mammalia - Mammals

> (A) Order Primates - Monkeys, Apes All species (W), except Family Hominidae
- not restricted.

>

> (B) Order Edendata - Sloths, Anteaters, Armadillos, etc. All species:

>

>   1. Family Dasypodidae - Armadillos - All Species (D).

>   2. Family Bradypodidae - Sloths - (W).

>   3. Family Myrmecophagidae - Anteaters - (W).

>

> (C) Order Marsupialia - Marsupials or Pouched Animals All species (W).

>

> (D) Order Insectivora - Shrews, Moles, Hedgehogs, etc. All species (D).

>

> (E) Order Dermoptera - Gliding Lemurs All species (D).

>

> (F) Order Chiroptera - Bats All species (D).

>

> (G) Order Monotremata - Spiny Anteaters, Platypuses All Species (W).

>

> (H) Order Pholidota - Pangolins or Scaly Anteaters All species (W).

>

> (I) Order Lagomorpha - Pikas, Rabbits, and Hares All species, (D), except
domesticated races of rabbits and hares of the Family Leporidae - not
restricted.

>

> (J) Order Rodentia - Hamsters, Field Mice, Voles, Muskrats, Gerbils,
Squirrels, Chipmunks, Woodchucks, and Prairie Dogs

>

>   1. All species (D), except:

>

>>   1. _Ondatra zibethica_ (Muskrats) - Not restricted under conditions set
forth in Fish and Game Code Section 2250;

>>   2. Domesticated races of golden hamsters of the species _Mesocricetus
auratus_ and domesticated races of dwarf hamsters of the Genus _Phodopus_ not
restricted;

>>   3. Domesticated races of rats or mice (white or albino; trained, dancing
or spinning, laboratory-reared) not restricted;

>>   4. Domesticated races of guinea pigs of the species _Cavia porcellus_ not
restricted; and e. Domesticated races of chinchillas of the species
_Chinchilla laniger_ not restricted.

>

> (K) Order Carnivora - Raccoons, Ringtailed Cats, Kinkajous, Coatis,
Cacomistles, Weasels, Ferrets, Skunks, Polecats, stoats, Mongoose, Civets,
Wolves, Foxes, Coyotes, Lions, Tigers, Ocelots, Bobcats, Servals, Leopards,
Jaguars, Cheetahs, Bears, etc.

>

>   1. Family Felidae - All species (W) except:

>     1. _Acinonyx jubatus_ (cheetahs) - (D).

>     2. Domestic cats and hybrids of domestic cats are not restricted.

>   2. Family Canidae - All species (W).

>     1. Wolf hybrids _Canis familiaris_ (domestic dog) x _Canis lupus_
(wolf).

>       1. Any F1 (first) generation wolf hybrid whelped on or before February
4, 1988 may be possessed under permit from the department.

>       2. No state permit is required to possess the progeny of F1 generation
wolf hybrids, but cities and counties may prohibit possession or require a
permit.

>     2. Domesticated dogs are not restricted.

>   3. Family Viverridae - All species (D).

>   4. Family Procyonidae - All species - (D), except:

>     1. _Ailuris fulgens_ (Lesser Panda) - (W).

>     2. _Aiuropoda melanoleuca_ (Giant panda) - (W).

>     3. _Bassariscus astutus_ (Ringtail or Ringtailed cat) - (W).

>     4. _Jentinkia sumichrasti_ (Mexican and Central American Cacomistle -
(W).

>   5. Family Mustelidae - All species (D), except:

>     1. _Ambloynx cinerea_ (Oriental small-clawed otter) - (W).

>     2. _Aonyx capensis_ (African clawless otter) - (W).

>     3. _Pteronura brasiliensis_ (Giant otter) - (W).

>     4. All species of _Genus Lutra_ (River otters) - (W).

>   6. All others - (W).

>

> (L) Order Tubulidentata - Aardvarks All species - (W).

>

> (M) Order Proboscidae - Elephants All species - (W).

>

> (N) Order Hyracoidae - Hyraxes All species - (W).

>

> (O) Order Sirenia - Dugongs, Manatees All species - (W).

>

> (P) Order Perissodactyla - Horses, Zebras, Tapirs, Rhinoceroses, etc. All
species (W), except Family Equidae is not restricted.

>

> (Q) Order Artiodactyl - Swine, Peccaries, Camels, Deer, Elk, Moose,
Antelopes, Cattle, Goats, Sheep, etc. All species (D) except:

>

>   1. _Bos taurus_ and _Bos indicus_ (Domestic cattle); _Bos grunniens_
(Yak); _Bubalus bulalis_ (Asian water buffalo); _Ovis aries_ (Domestic sheep);
_Capra hircus_ (Domestic goat); _Sus scrofa domestica_ (Domestic swine); _
Llama glama_ (Llama); _Llama pacos_ (Alpaca); _Llama guanicoe_ (Guanaco);
Hybrids of llama, alpaca and guanacos; _Camelus bactrianus_ and _Camelus
dromedarius_ (Camels); and _Bison bison_ (American bison), are not restricted.

>   2. Permits may be issued for species of Elk (Genus _Cervus_) which are
already maintained within California; and

>   3. Permits may be issued pursuant to Section 676, Title 14, CCR, for
importing, breeding, slaughter and sale of the meat and other parts of fallow
deer (_Dama dama_) for commercial purposes.

(3) Class Amphibia - Frogs, Toads, Salamanders

> (A) Family Bufonidae - Toads _Bufo marinus_, _Bufo paracnemis_, _Bufo
horribilis_ (Giant toad or marine toad group) and all other large toads from
Mexico and Central and South America (D).

>

> (B) Family Pipidae - Tongueless Toads All species of the Genus Xenopus (D).

(4) Class Agnatha - Jawless Fishes

> (A) Family Petromyzontidae - Lampreys All nonnative species (D).

(5) Class Osteichthyes - Bony Fishes

> (A) Family Percichthyidae - Temperate Basses

>

>   1. The species _Morone americana_ (White perch) (D).

>   2. The species _Morone chrysops_ (White bass) (D).

>

> (B) Family Clupeidae - Herrings _Dorosoma cepedianum_ (Gizzard shad) (D).

>

> (C) Family Sciaenidae - Drums _Aplodinotus grunniens_ (freshwater drum) (D).

>

> (D) Family Characidae - Characins

>

>   1. _Astyanax fasciatus_ (Banded tetra) (D).

>   2. All species of the genera _Serrasalmus_, _Serrasalmo_, _Pygocentrus_,
_Taddyella_, _Rooseveltiella_, and _Pygopristis_ (Piranhas) (D).

>   3. _Hoplias malabaricus_ (Tiger fish) (D).

>

> (E) Family Salmonidae - Trouts _Salmo salar_ (Atlantic salmon) - Restricted
in the Smith River watershed (D).

>

> (F) Family Lepisosteidae - Gars All species (D).

>

> (G) Family Amiidae - Bowfins All species (D).

>

> (H) Family Poeciliidae - Livebearers _Belonesox belizanus_ (Pike killifish)
(D).

>

> (I) Family Channidae - Snakeheads All species (D).

>

> (J) Family Cyprinidae - Carps and Minnows

>

>   1. _Leuciscus idus_ (ide) (D).

>   2. _Ctenopharyngodon idellus_ (Grass carp) (D), except that permits may be
issued to a person, organization or agency for possession of triploid grass
carp, under conditions set forth in Section 238.6.

>   3. _Hypophthalmichthys molitrix_ (Silver carp) (D).

>   4. _Aristichthys nobilis_ (Bighead carp) (D).

>

> (K) Family Trichomycteridae (_Pygidiidae_) - Parasitic Catfishes. All
species (D).

>

> (L) Family Cetopsidae - Whalelike Catfishes. All species (D).

>

> (M) Family Clariidae - Labyrinth Catfishes All species of the genera
_Clarias_, _ Dinotopterus_, and _Heterobranchus_ (D).

>

> (N) Family Heteropneustidae (Saccobranchidae) - Airsac Catfishes All species
(D).

>

> (O) Family Cichlidae - Cichlids

>

>   1. _Tilapia sparrmani_ (Banded Tilapia) (D).

>   2. _Tilapia zilli_ (Redbelly tilapia) (D), except permits may be issued to
a person or agency for importation, transportation, or possession in the
counties of San Bernardino, Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Diego, and
Imperial.

>   3. _Tilapia aurea_ (Blue tilapia) (D).

>   4. _Tilapia nilotica_ (Nile tilapia) (D).

>

> (P) Family Anguillidae - Freshwater Eels. All species of genus _Anguilla_
(D).

>

> (Q) Family Esocidae - Pikes all species (D).

>

> (R) Family Percidae - Perches

>

>   1. _Perca flavescens_ (Yellow perch) (D).

>   2. _Stizostedion vitreum_ (Walleye) (D).

>

> (S) Family Catostomidae - Suckers All members of the genus _Ictiobus_
(Buffalos) (D).

>

> (T) Family Cyprinodontidae - Killifishes _Cyprinodon variegatus_ (Sheepshead
minnow) (D).

(6) Class Elasmobranchiomorphi - Cartilaginous Fishes

> (A) Family Carcharhinidae - Requiem Sharks All species of genus Carcharhinus
(Freshwater sharks) (D).

>

> (B) Family Potamotrygonidae - River stingrays All species (D).

(7) Class Reptilia - Reptiles

> (A) Order Crocodilia - Crocodiles, Caimans, Alligators and Gavials All
species (D).

>

> (B) Family Chelyridae - Snapping Turtles All species (D).

>

> (C) Family Elapidae - Cobras, Coral Snakes, Mambas, Kraits, etc. All species
(D).

>

> (D) Family Viperidae - Adders and Vipers All species (D).

>

> (E) Family Crotalidae - Pit Vipers All species (D), except _Crotalus
viridis_ (Western rattlesnake), _Crotalus atrox_ (Western diamondback
rattlesnake), _Crotalus ruber_ (red diamondback rattlesnake), _Crotalus
scutulatus_ (Mojave rattlesnake), _Crotalus mitchelli_ (speckled rattlesnake)
and _Crotalus cerastes_ (Sidewinder) not restricted.

>

> (F) Family Colubridae - Colubrids

>

>   1. _Dispholidus typus_ (Boomslang) (D).

>   2. _Theoltornis kitlandii_ (Bird or vine snake) (D).

>

> (G) Family Helodermatidae

>

>   1. _Heloderma suspectum suspectum_ (reticulate Gila monster) (D).

(8) Class Crustacea - Crustaceans

> (A) All species of Family Cambaridae - Crayfish, etc. (D), except
_Procambarus clarkii_ and _Orconectes virilis_ not restricted.

>

> (B) All species of genus _Eriocheir_ (D).

(9) Class Gastropoda - Slugs, Snails All nonnative species of slugs and land
snails (D), except:

> (A) _Rumina decollata_ (decollate snail) in the counties of San Bernardino,
Riverside, Imperial, Orange, San Diego, Los Angeles, Ventura, Kern, Fresno,
Madera, Tulare and Santa Barbara not restricted with the concurrence of the
appropriate county agricultural commissioners.

>

> (B) _Helix aspersa_ (brown garden snail) not prohibited.

(10) Class Bivalvia - Bivalves All members of the genus _Dreissena_ (zebra
mussels) - (D).

NOTE: Authority cited: Sections 2118 and 2120, Fish and Game Code. Reference:
Sections 1002, 2116, 2118, 2118.2, 2118.4, 2119-2155, 3005.9 and 3005.92, Fish
and Game Code. HISTORY 1. Amendment of subsection (g)(5) filed 2-9-84;
effective thirtieth day thereafter (Register 84, No. 6). For prior history,
see Register 81, No. 29. 2. Amendment of subsection (i) filed 7-8-85;
effective thirtieth day thereafter (Register 85, No. 28). 3. Editorial
correction of NOTE filed 9-20-85; effective thirtieth day thereafter (Register
85, No. 38). 4. Notice of Erroneous Filing filed 3-24-86 by OAL; purported
amendment of subsection (g)(5) filed in error on 2-5-86 is null and void and
text as filed with Secretary of State on 2-9-84 remains in effect
uninterrupted (Register 86, No. 13). 5. Amendment of subsection (g)(5) filed
3-24-86; effective thirtieth day thereafter (Register 86, No. 13). 6.
Amendment of subsection (h) filed 11-7-86; effective upon filing (Register 86,
No. 45). 7. Amendment of subsection (g)(1) filed 5-1-87; operative 5-31-87
(Register 87, No. 19). 8. New subsection (e)(15) filed 2-16-88; operative
3-17-88 (Register 88, No. 9). 9. Amendment of subsection (b) filed 9-8-88;
operative 10-8-88 (Register 88, No. 38). 10. Amendment filed 2-26-92;
operative 2-26-92 pursuant to Government Code section 11346.2(d) (Register 92,
No. 13). 11. Amendment filed 7-21-93; operative 7-21-93 pursuant to section
202, Fish and Game Code (Register 93, No. 30). 12. Amendment of subsection
(c)(9)(A) filed 2-28-94; operative 3-30-94 (Register 94, No. 9). 13. New
subsection (c)(10) filed 3-7-94; operative 4-6-94 (Register 94, No. 10). 14.
Amendment of subsection (c)(1)(I)2 filed 8-23-94; operative 9-22-94 (Register
94, No. 34). 15. Editorial correction of designation of subsection (c)(5)(G)
(Register 94, No. 34). 16. Amendment of subsections (c)(2)(Q)2-3 filed
12-7-94; operative 12-7-94 pursuant to Government Code section 11346.2(d)
(Register 94, No. 49). 17. Change without regulatory effect amending
subsection (c)(1)(C) filed 9-28-95 pursuant to section 1:100, title 1,
California Code of Regulations (Register 95, No. 39). 18. Amendment of
subsection (c)(5)(J)2. filed 5-5-97; operative 6-4-97 (Register 97, No. 19).
19. Amendment of section heading and section filed 8-27-98; operative 9-26-98
(Register 98, No. 35).

* * *

โข CAL. CODE REGS. Tit. 14 ยง671.1 - Permits for Restricted Species.

(a) General. It is unlawful for any person to import, export, transport,
maintain, dispose of, or use for any purpose any animal restricted by Section
671 except as authorized in a permit issued by the department.

(1) Limited Scope. A permit issued pursuant to this Section 671.1 does not
supersede any Federal, State, or local law regulating or prohibiting the
mammals or the activities authorized in the permit.

(2) Inspections. The department may approve an application prior to facilities
being inspected and approved. A permit shall not be issued unless the
applicant's facilities have been inspected and approved by the department or
persons designated by the department.

The department may enter any facility at a reasonable hour, where restricted
species are kept or may be kept to inspect animals, facilities, animal
equipment, or to inspect, audit, or copy any permit, book or record required
to be kept by these regulations or federal regulations relating to such
species.

(3) Change of Address or Name. The permittee must notify the Department's
License and Revenue Division, 3211 S Street, Sacramento, California 95816, in
writing of any change of address or name related to the permit within fourteen
(14) days of the change.

(4) Records. Any record, log, invoice, or other document required by this
Section 671.1 shall be maintained by the permittee for at least three years
from the date issued, and be made available to the department immediately upon
demand.

(5) Transportation Records Required of Broker/Dealer. The permittee shall
prepare and sign an invoice in duplicate prior to any animals leaving their
facility. The invoice shall contain the name and address of the Broker/Dealer,
a phone number where the Broker/Dealer and the consignee can be reached 24
hours, the name and address of the consignee, the date of the shipment, and
the number and scientific name of each animal. The invoice shall accompany the
animals being shipped. The consignee shall sign and date the invoice receipt
of the shipment and retain a copy.

(6) Permits for Business. A person (as defined in Fish and Game Code Section
67) other than a natural person can qualify for and be issued a permit, only
by employing at least one full time employee who possesses the requirements
for obtaining a permit. The permittee must continue to employ such qualified
persons as long as the animals are possessed in California.

(7) Financial Responsibility. The department may require an applicant for a
nonresident permit to provide proof he/she will immediately cover all expenses
incurred by the department for personnel, equipment, and facilities used to
locate, capture, house, care for, and transport animals that escape or that
are released or abandoned. The written proof must be in the form of an
insurance bond or other financial guarantee payable to the department, local
government agency, or entity contracting for the animals.

(8) Health Certificates. The department may require as a condition on any
permit that restricted animals be approved for interstate shipment pursuant to
applicable federal or state agency standards for diseases such as but not
limited to tuberculosis, brucellosis, and pseudo rabies. Permit conditions may
be more restrictive than federal standards.

(b) Permits and Fees. The following fees will be adjusted annually pursuant to
Section 699, Title 14, CCR. The department may issue permits with the
conditions it determines are necessary to protect native wildlife, agriculture
interests, animal welfare, and/or human health and safety to:

(1) Animal Care. A person who is a resident and who has the demonstrated
experience and ability to house an animal, and who legally possessed the
animal in California prior to January 1992. The permittee may only possess and
provide care for the animal(s) specifically listed on their department
approved permit inventory. No other activity is authorized except that which
is medically necessary for the care of the animal. The base permit fees for
this activity in 1998 are $34.75 for Welfare species and $289.50 for
Detrimental species.