# Connecticut State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

### Revised statutes to come.

• CONN. GEN. STAT. §26-40A - Possession of potentially dangerous animals.

For the purposes of this section, the following shall be considered as
potentially dangerous animals: The felidae, including the lion, leopard,
cheetah, jaguar, ocelot, jaguarundi cat, puma, lynx and bobcat; the canidae,
including the wolf and coyote; and the ursidae, including the black bear,
grizzly bear and brown bear. No person shall possess a potentially dangerous
animal. Any such animal illegally possessed may be ordered seized and may be
disposed of as determined by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection. Any
person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined not more than
one hundred dollars for each offense. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to municipal parks, zoos and nature centers, or museums, laboratories
and research facilities maintained by scientific or educational institutions;
to a person possessing a Bengal cat certified by an internationally recognized
multiple-cat domestic feline breeding association as being without wild
parentage for a minimum of four prior generations which cat was registered
with the Commissioner of Agriculture on or before October 1, 1996, provided no
such cat may be imported into this state after June 6, 1996; or to persons
possessing animals legally on or before May 23, 1983. In any action taken by
any official of the state or any municipality to control rabies, a Bengal cat
shall be considered not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with accepted
veterinary practice.(1967, P.A. 344; P.A. 83-191, S. 2, 9; P.A. 96-243, S. 5,
16.)

* * *

• CONN. GEN. STAT. §26-55 - Permit for importing, possessing or liberating
fish, wild birds, wild quadrupeds, reptiles or amphibians.

No person shall import or introduce into the state, or possess or liberate
therein, any live fish, wild bird, wild mammal, reptile, amphibian or
invertebrate unless such person has obtained a permit therefor from the
commissioner provided nothing in this section shall be construed to require
such permit for any primate species that weighs not more than fifty pounds at
maturity that was imported or possessed in the state prior to October 1, 2003.
Such permit may be issued at the discretion of the commissioner under such
regulations as the commissioner may prescribe. The commissioner may by
regulation prescribe the numbers of live fish, wild birds, wild mammals,
reptiles, amphibians or invertebrates of certain species which may be
imported, possessed, introduced into the state or liberated therein. The
commissioner may by regulation exempt certain species or groups of live fish
from the permit requirements. The commissioner may by regulation determine
which species of wild birds, wild mammals, reptiles, amphibians or
invertebrates must meet permit requirements. The commissioner may totally
prohibit the importation, possession, introduction into the state or
liberation therein of certain species which the commissioner has determined
may be a potential threat to humans, agricultural crops or established species
of plants, fish, birds, mammals, reptiles, amphibians or invertebrates. The
commissioner may by regulation exempt from permit requirements organizations
or institutions such as zoos, research laboratories, colleges or universities,
public nonprofit aquaria or nature centers where live fish, wild birds, wild
mammals, reptiles, amphibians or invertebrates are held in strict confinement.
Any such fish, bird, mammal, reptile, amphibian or invertebrate illegally
imported into the state or illegally possessed therein shall be seized by any
representative of the Department of Environmental Protection and shall be
disposed of as determined by the commissioner. Any person, except as provided
in section 26-55a, who violates any provision of this section or any
regulation issued by the commissioner as provided in this section shall be
guilty of an infraction. Importation, liberation or possession of each fish,
wild bird, wild mammal, reptile, amphibian or invertebrate in violation of
this section or such regulation shall be a separate and distinct offense and,
in the case of a continuing violation each day of continuance thereof shall be
deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.