# Delaware State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• DEL. CODE ANN tit. 3 §7201. - Possession; permit required.

No person shall bring into this State, possess, sell or exhibit any live wild
mammal or hybrid of a wild mammal or live reptile not native to or generally
found in Delaware without first securing a permit under this chapter. The
Department of Agriculture may adopt regulations to exempt such mammals and
reptiles that do not represent a significant threat to community interests
from the provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding any provisions of this
chapter to the contrary, no person shall bring into this State, possess, sell
or exhibit any poisonous snake not native to or generally found in Delaware
where the venom of such snake poses a risk of serious injury or death to a
human, and no permit for the same shall be issued by the Department of
Agriculture.

* * *

• DEL. CODE ANN tit. 3 §7202. - Permit; rules and regulations; exemptions.

The Department of Agriculture shall enforce this chapter and may issue a
permit where the possession or exhibition of a live wild mammal or hybrid of a
wild mammal or live reptile will be in the public interest, and may promulgate
rules and regulations for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The
Department may designate agencies authorized to conduct animal cruelty
enforcement and/or dog control enforcement to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. The Department shall receive a fee of $25 for each and every permit
issued. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the use of any live
wild mammal or hybrid of a wild mammal or live reptile in medical or
psychological research or for display in any municipal zoological park or
traveling circus after issuance of a permit.

* * *

• DEL. CODE ANN tit. 3 §7203. - Penalties.

Whoever violates this chapter shall for each offense be fined not more than
$500, imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. Justices of the peace shall
have jurisdiction over offenses under this chapter.