# Hawaii State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• HAW. ADMIN. RULES §4-71-5 - Notice of Quarantine.

The board finds that there exists serious danger to the agricultural,
horticultural, and aquacultural industries, natural resources, and environment
of Hawaii by the uncontrolled introduction of feral and other non-domestic
animals.

* * *

• HAW. ADMIN. RULES §4-71-6 - Prohibited introductions.

(a) The introduction into Hawaii of live animals or live non-domestic animals
as defined in this chapter at any stage of development is prohibited except
for those animals on the lists incorporated in §4-71-6.5 by permit, and except
as provided by section 150A-6(b), HRS.

(b) The list of animals designated as prohibited entry pursuant to sections
150A-6(b) and 150A 6(d), HRS, dated November 18, 1998, and located at the end
of this chapter is made a part of this section. No person shall introduce into
Hawaii any animal from the list of prohibited animals.

PROHIBITED ANIMAL LIST - MAMMALS

SCIENTIFIC NAME

COMMON NAME

PHYLUM Chordara (crosses with prohibited species)

Animals, hybrid; (all hybrid-crossed where one or both parents are prohibited)

_Canis familiaris_ crossed with wolf, coyote, dingo, jackal, fox, dhole,
African wild dog, racoon dog, bush dog, etc.

dog, hybrid; (all hybrid-crosses, where one or both parents are prohibited or
restricted)

_Felis catus_ crossed with lynx, ocelot, margay, puma, jaguarandi, bobcat,
leopard cat, wild cat, etc.

Cat hybrid; (all hybrid-crosses where one or both parents are prohibited or
restricted)

CLASS Mammalia; ORDER Chiroptera Chiroptera (all species in order)

Bats

FAMILY Pteropodidae _Pteropus_ (all species in genus)

foxes, flying

ORDER Lagomorpha FAMILY Leporidae LeDus (all species in genus)

hares, wild

ORDER Rodentia FAMILY Cricetidae

Cricetidae (all in family, except the following five species for research by
government agencies only: Cricetulus griseus (mouse, Chinese); Gerbillus
gerbillus (gerbil); Mesocricetus auratus (hamster); Meriones unquiculatus
(gerbil); and Sigmondon hispidus (rat, cotton))

* * *

• HAW. ADMIN. RULES §4-71-6.1 - Ad hoc panel for identification of prohibited
hybrid animal.

(a) The chairperson shall establish an ad hoc panel of no fewer than three
members with applicable expertise in vertebrate biology to determine if an
animal is a prohibited hybrid animal when the branch suspects that the lineage
of the animal is not as stated by the owner or on other official documents.

(b) The ad hoc panel shall review all pertinent information including, but not
limited to, expert consultations, health and pedigree certificates, owner's
statements, branch findings, or viewings of the animal, to determine lineage
of a suspect prohibited hybrid animal.

(c) After its review and determination the ad hoc panel shall report its
findings to the branch, and appropriate action shall be taken by the branch on
the disposition of the suspect hybrid prohibited animal.

(d) In any contested case arising out of the identification of a suspected
hybrid animal, the method of identification selected by the ad hoc panel shall
not be overturned absent evidence of actual bias on the part of one or more of
the ad hoc panel members or unless the method of identification lacks a
scientific basis.

* * *

• HAW. ADMIN. RULES §4-71-6.5 - Permitted introductions.

(a) The introduction into Hawaii of live animals or live non-domestic animals
as defined in this chapter is only allowed:

> (1) For those animals on the list designated as conditionally-approved and
dated November 18, 1998, or on the list designated as restricted entry, dated
November 18, 1998, pursuant to section I50A-6(b), HRS, both of which lists are
located at the end of this chapter and made a part of this section;

>

> (2) By permit approved by the board or chief pursuant to sections 4-71-3 and
4-71-4; and

>

> (3) After securing appropriate bond for certain animals pursuant to sections
4-71-7, 4-71-8, and 4-71-9.

(b) Pursuant to the requirements of subsection (a) herein, the introduction of
animals on the lists of conditionally-approved or restricted animals is
allowed as follows:

> (1) Animals on the list of conditionally-approved animals, for individual
possession, businesses, or institutions;

>

> (2) Animals on Part A of the list of restricted animals, for research by
universities or government agencies, exhibition in municipal zoos or
government-affiliated aquariums, for other institutions for medical or
scientific purposes as determined by the board, or for other purposes as
specified in this chapter; and

>

> (3) Animals on Part B of the list of restricted animals, for the purposes
described in subsection (b)(2) herein or for private and commercial use,
including research, zoological parks, or aquaculture production.

(c) The introduction of unlisted animals for the purpose of conducting
scientific research that is not detrimental to agriculture, the environment,
or humans requires a special permit on a case-by-case basis for import and
possession if the importer can meet permit requirements or other guidelines as
determined by the board pursuant to section 150A-6(b), HRS.

(d) The introduction of unlisted animals for the purpose of filming,
performance, or exhibition requires a short-term special permit on a case-by-
case basis not to exceed 90 days for importation and possession if the
importer can meet permit and bonding requirements as determined by the board
pursuant to section 150A-6(b), HRS.

(e) The permittee shall obtain prior site approval for animals on the list of
restricted animals and for unlisted animals under special permit as determined
by the board.

(f) Restricted list animals and unlisted animals under special permit as
determined by the board require a permit for both import and possession. Where
a permit for a restricted list animal allows transfer or sale, the proposed
transferee shall first obtain a permit for possession of the animal by
application to the chief, site inspection approval, and satisfaction of any
bond or other requirements applicable.

(g) The board may establish permit conditions including but not limited to,
time, place, location, use, special precautions, health requirements, and
safeguarding the animal from escape, unauthorized release, or theft, as well
as any applicable requirements of municipal, state or federal laws. The
permittee shall comply with the requirements of this chapter, chapter 150A,
HRS, and specific permit conditions established by the board.