# Idaho State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

โข IDAHO CODE ยง36-701 - Wildlife held captive without license or permit
unlawful - Exceptions

(a) No person shall engage in any propagation or hold in captivity any species
of big game animal found wild in this state, unless the person has been issued
a license or permit by the director as hereinafter provided.

(b) All other species of mammals, birds or reptiles that are found in the wild
in this state and are not species of special concern or threatened and
endangered species, may be held in captivity without permit so long as the
possessor retains proof that such wildlife was lawfully obtained. Such proof
shall be maintained and presented to department representatives in accordance
with section 36-709, Idaho Code.

(c) Exceptions.

1\. No such license or permit shall be required of any municipal, county,
state or other publicly owned zoo or wildlife exhibit or of any traveling
circus, menagerie or trained act of wild animals not permanently located
within the state of Idaho nor of any bona fide pet store displaying lawfully
acquired wildlife for sale nor of any fur farm regulated and inspected
pursuant to chapter 30, title 25, Idaho Code, nor of any domestic cervidae
farm regulated and inspected pursuant to chapter 35, title 25, Idaho Code.

2\. Except for the provisions of paragraph (d) below and section 36-709, Idaho
Code, relating to inspection and records of same, nothing in this chapter
shall be so construed as to apply to any exotic wildlife, or domestic fur farm
operated under the provisions of title 25, Idaho Code, or any tropical fish or
other aquaria or ornamental fish which the commission determines do not pose a
threat to native fish if released into the public waters of the state.

3\. Except for the provisions of section 36-709(b), Idaho Code, relating to
inspection of facilities, nothing in this chapter shall be so construed as to
apply to any domestic cervidae farm.

(d) No person shall import into this state or release in the wild any species
of wildlife except by permit issued by the director.