# Kansas State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• KAN. STAT. ANN § 32-1301. Definitions.

As used in this act:

(a) 'Person' means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, municipality or other business entity.

(b) 'Wildlife sanctuary' means a not-for-profit organization exempt from
federal income taxation pursuant to section 501 (c)(3) of the internal revenue
code of 1986, as in effect on July 1, 2006, that:

(1) Operates a place of refuge where abused, neglected, unwanted, impounded,
abandoned, orphaned or displaced dangerous regulated animals are provided care
for such animal's lifetime;

(2) does not conduct any commercial activity with respect to any dangerous
regulated animal possessed by the organization;

(3) does not sell, trade, auction, lease or loan dangerous regulated animals,
or parts thereof, which the organization possesses;

(4) does not breed any dangerous regulated animal of which the organization
possesses, except as an integral part of the species survival plan of the
American zoo and aquarium association;

(5) does not conduct any activity that is not inherent to the dangerous
regulated animal's nature;

(6) does not use the dangerous regulated animal for any type of entertainment
purposes; and

(7) operates a refuge in compliance with regulations promulgated by the United
States department of agriculture for dangerous regulated animals, except non-
native, venomous snakes, under the animal welfare act, public law 89-544, as
amended and in effect on July 1, 2006, and the regulations and standards
adopted under such act in effect on July 1, 2006, relating to operations,
animal health and husbandry. All dangerous regulated animals shall be caged in
compliance with the provisions set forth in K.S.A. 2006 Supp. 32-1306, and
amendments thereto.

(c) 'Possess' means to own, care for, have custody of or control.

(d) 'Dangerous regulated animal' means a live or slaughtered parts of:

(1) Lions, tigers, leopards, jaguars, cheetahs and mountain lions, or any
hybrid thereof;

(2) bears or any hybrid thereof; and

(3) all non-native, venomous snakes.

(e) 'Local animal control authority' means an agency of the county or city
that is responsible for animal control operations in such governmental
entity's jurisdiction and includes the animal control officer, as defined by
K.S.A. 47-1701, and amendments thereto, of such county or city. If the county
or city does not have an animal control officer, for cities of the first
class, the chief law enforcement officer shall have the local animal control
authority duties and responsibilities pursuant to this act and for all other
cities and counties, the county sheriff shall have the local animal control
authority duties and responsibilities pursuant to this act.

(f) 'Registered designated handler' means a person who is registered or would
be required to be registered pursuant to K.S.A. 2006 Supp. 32-1310, and
amendments thereto.

* * *

• KAN. STAT. ANN § 32-1302. Unlawful acts; compliance with USDA regulations;
USDA license.

(a) Except as provided in this section, it is unlawful for a person to
possess, slaughter, sell, purchase or otherwise acquire a dangerous regulated
animal.

(b) On and after October 1, 2006, a person who possesses a dangerous regulated
animal shall be in compliance with regulations promulgated by the United
States department of agriculture for dangerous regulated animals, except non-
native, venomous snakes, under the animal welfare act, public law 89-544, as
amended and in effect on July 1, 2006, and the regulations and standards
adopted under such act in effect on July 1, 2006, relating to operations,
animal health and husbandry; and to provide adequate veterinary care for
dangerous regulated animals. All dangerous regulated animals shall be caged in
compliance with the provisions set forth in K.S.A. 2006 Supp. 32-1306, and
amendments thereto.

(c) Except as provided in subsection (d), a person shall not take possession
of a dangerous regulated animal or allow dangerous regulated animals in such
person's possession to breed.

(d) A person who possesses a valid United States department of agriculture
license, is in compliance with the United States department of agriculture
animal welfare act, regulations and standards on July 1, 2006, and, within 10
years preceding July 1, 2006, has not been convicted of a felony under the
laws of Kansas or a crime under a law of another jurisdiction which is
substantially the same as a felony, may breed, purchase or otherwise acquire
new dangerous regulated animals after July 1, 2006, in order to:

(1) Maintain the operating inventory of dangerous regulated animals possessed
on July 1, 2006;

(2) sell dangerous regulated animals to other United States department of
agriculture licensed and compliant facilities within Kansas for replacement
purposes as provided in paragraph (1); and

(3) sell dangerous regulated animals outside Kansas.

* * *

• KAN. STAT. ANN § 32-1303. Registration with local animal control authority;
notification; microchip implant; inspection.

(a) On and after September 1, 2006, a person who possesses a dangerous
regulated animal shall notify, in writing, and register the dangerous
regulated animal with the local animal control authority.

(b) The notification shall include the person's name, address, telephone
number and a complete inventory of each dangerous regulated animal that the
person possesses. The inventory shall include the following information:
Number and species of each dangerous regulated animal; the microchip
identification number and manufacturer of such microchip for each dangerous
regulated animal, if available; the exact location where each dangerous
regulated animal is kept; the age, sex, color, weight, scars and any
distinguishing marks of each dangerous regulated animal; and the name of any
person who is a registered designated handler.

(c) When a person who possesses a dangerous regulated animal has a microchip
implanted in such animal for identification, the name of the microchip
manufacturer and the microchip identification number shall be provided to the
local animal control authority. If a dangerous regulated animal is sedated for
any reason and such animal does not have a microchip implanted, a microchip
shall be implanted in such animal. Within 30 days after the microchip is
implanted, the name of the microchip manufacturer and the microchip
identification number shall be provided to the local animal control authority.
Within 30 days of acquisition, a person acquiring ownership of an offspring
with a microchip implanted shall comply with microchip information reporting
requirements of this subsection.

(d) A local animal control authority may inspect the premises where dangerous
regulated animals are physically located.

* * *

• KAN. STAT. ANN§ 32-1304. Fees; liability coverage or bond.

(a) The local animal control authority may charge the following annual fees:

(1) Premises inspection fee not more than $100.

(2) Dangerous regulated animal registration fee, per animal, not more than
$50. The maximum amount charged for such animal registration per person is
$500.

(3) Additional premise inspection fee, if the person acquires and possesses
another type of dangerous regulated animal, not more than $100.

(b) A certificate of registration shall be issued by the local animal control
authority to the person for each dangerous regulated animal and inspection
upon payment of the fee.

(c) Any person who possesses a dangerous regulated animal shall maintain
liability insurance coverage or secure a bond in an amount of not less than
$250,000 for each occurrence for liability damages for destruction of or
damage to property and death or bodily injury to a person caused by the
dangerous regulated animal. The person possessing the animal shall provide a
copy of the policy for liability insurance or proof of the bond to the local
animal control authority. Any insurer shall notify the local animal control
authority, in writing, of any expiration, reduction or cancellation of
liability insurance, furnished as required by this subsection, not later than
10 days before the expiration, reduction or cancellation takes effect. Any
surety company who secures the performance of the bond shall notify the local
animal control authority, in writing, of any expiration, reduction or
cancellation of the bond, furnished as required by this subsection, not later
than 10 days before the expiration, reduction or cancellation takes effect.

(d) Any fees charged and collected shall be retained by the local animal
control authority to be used to implement the provisions of this act.

* * *

• KAN. STAT. ANN§ 32-1305. Health and ownership records; change of address
notification; escape notification.

(a) A person who possesses a dangerous regulated animal shall meet the
requirements set forth in this section.

(b) A person who possesses a dangerous regulated animal shall maintain health
and ownership records on each dangerous regulated animal and shall maintain
the records for the life of the animal. If possession of the dangerous
regulated animal is transferred to another person, a copy of the health and
ownership records shall accompany the animal.

(c) A person who possesses a dangerous regulated animal shall maintain an
ongoing program of veterinary care which includes a veterinary visit to the
premises at least annually.

(d) A person who possesses a dangerous regulated animal shall notify the local
animal control authority in writing within 10 days of a change in address or
location where the dangerous regulated animal is kept.

(e) A person with a United States department of agriculture license for
dangerous regulated animals shall forward a copy of such person's United
States department of agriculture inspection report to the local animal control
authority within 30 days of receipt of the inspection report.

(f) A person who possesses a dangerous regulated animal shall prominently
display a sign on the structure where the animal is housed indicating that a
dangerous regulated animal is on the premises.

(g) A person who possesses a dangerous regulated animal shall immediately
notify local law enforcement officials of any escape of a dangerous regulated
animal. The person who possesses the dangerous regulated animal is liable for
any costs incurred by any person, city, county or state agency resulting from
the escape of a dangerous regulated animal unless the escape is due to a
criminal act by another person or a natural event.

(h) A person who possesses a dangerous regulated animal shall maintain a
written recovery plan in the event of the escape of a dangerous regulated
animal. The person shall maintain live traps or other equipment necessary to
assist in the recovery of the dangerous regulated animal.

(i) If requested by the local animal control authority, a person may not move
a dangerous regulated animal from such animal's location unless the person
notifies the local animal control authority prior to moving the animal. The
notification shall include the date and the location where the animal is
moved. This subsection shall not apply to a dangerous regulated animal
transported to a licensed veterinarian.

(j) If a person who possesses a dangerous regulated animal can no longer care
for the animal, the person shall take the appropriate steps to find long-term
placement for the dangerous regulated animal.

* * *

• KAN. STAT. ANN§ 32-1306. Cage and care requirements; physical contact
prohibition.

(a) All dangerous regulated animals shall be confined within a cage of
sufficient strength and design for the purposes of maintaining and housing or
transporting the animal. The requirements for sufficient caging shall be
established by rules and regulations adopted by the secretary of wildlife and
parks. Any cage or confinement structure shall be constructed in such a manner
that prohibits physical contact with any person other than such persons listed
in subsection (d).

(b) No dangerous regulated animal shall be allowed to be tethered, leashed or
chained outdoors, or allowed to run at large.

(c) A dangerous regulated animal shall not be mistreated, neglected, abandoned
or deprived of necessary food, water and sustenance.

(d) A dangerous regulated animal shall not be allowed to come into physical
contact with any person other than the person possessing the animal, the
registered designated handler or a veterinarian administering medical
examination, treatment or care.

(e) A dangerous regulated animal shall not be brought to any public property
or commercial or retail establishment, except to bring the animal to a
licensed veterinarian or veterinarian clinic.

* * *

• KAN. STAT. ANN§ 32-1307. Seizure of animals; access to premises; notice;
hearing; costs.

(a) Any dangerous regulated animal may be seized by the local animal control
authority as provided in this section.

(b) The local animal control authority, upon issuance of a notice of
inspection, shall be granted access at reasonable times to premises where the
local animal control authority has reason to believe a violation of this act
is occurring or has occurred.

(c) If a person who possesses a dangerous regulated animal is not in
compliance with the requirements of this act, the local animal control
authority shall take possession of the animal for custody and care, following
the procedures in this subsection.

(d) Upon request of a person possessing a dangerous regulated animal, the
local animal control authority may allow the animal to remain in the physical
custody of the owner for 30 days, during which time the owner shall take all
necessary actions to come in compliance with this act. During the 30-day
period, the local animal control authority may inspect, at any reasonable
time, the premises where the animal is kept.

(e) If a person who possesses a dangerous regulated animal is not in
compliance with this act following the 30-day period described in subsection
(d), the local animal control authority shall seize the animal and place it in
a holding facility that is appropriate for the species for up to 10 days. The
authority taking custody of an animal under this subsection shall provide a
notice of the seizure by delivering or mailing it to the person possessing
such dangerous regulated animal, by posting a copy of the notice at the
premise where the animal is taken into custody, or by delivering it to a
person residing on the premise. The notice shall include:

(1) A description of the animal seized; the authority for and purpose of the
seizure; the time, place and circumstances under which the animal was seized;
and a contact person and telephone number;

(2) a statement that a person from whom a dangerous regulated animal was
seized may post security to prevent disposition of the animal and may request
a hearing concerning the seizure and that failure to do so within five
business days of the date of the notice will result in disposition of the
animal;

(3) a statement that actual costs of the care, keeping and disposal of the
dangerous regulated animal are the responsibility of the person from whom the
animal was seized, except to the extent that a court or hearing officer finds
that the seizure was not substantially justified by law; and

(4) a form that can be used by a person from whom a dangerous regulated animal
was seized for requesting a hearing under this subsection.

(f) If a person from whom the dangerous regulated animal was seized makes a
request within five business days of the seizure, a hearing must be held
within five business days of the request to determine the validity of the
seizure and disposition of the animal. The judge or hearing officer may
authorize the return of the animal to the person from whom the animal was
seized if the judge or hearing officer finds:

(1) That the person can and will provide the care required by law for the
dangerous regulated animal; and

(2) the dangerous regulated animal is physically fit.

(g) If a judge or hearing officer orders a permanent disposition of the
dangerous regulated animal, the local animal control authority may take steps
to find long-term placement for the animal with a wildlife sanctuary, or an
appropriate United States department of agriculture licensed facility.

(h) A person from whom a dangerous regulated animal is seized is liable for
all actual costs of care, keeping and disposal of the animal, except to the
extent that a court or hearing officer finds that the seizure was not
substantially justified by law. The costs shall be paid in full or a mutually
satisfactory arrangement for payment shall be made between the local animal
control authority and the person claiming an interest in the animal before
return of the animal to the person.

(i) A person from whom a dangerous regulated animal has been seized under this
subsection may prevent disposition of the animal by posting security in the
amount sufficient to provide for the actual costs of care and keeping of the
animal. The security shall be posted within five business days of the seizure,
inclusive of the day of the seizure.

(j) If circumstances exist threatening the life of a person or the life of any
animal, any law enforcement agency or the local animal control authority shall
seize a dangerous regulated animal without an opportunity for hearing or court
order, or destroy the animal.

(k) Upon proper determination by a licensed veterinarian, any dangerous
regulated animal taken into custody under this section may be immediately
euthanized when the dangerous regulated animal is suffering and is beyond cure
through reasonable care and treatment.

(l) The agency or authority taking custody of the dangerous regulated animal
may recover all costs incurred under this section.

* * *

• KAN. STAT. ANN§ 32-1308. Exemptions.

Exemptions to the provisions set forth in this act are as follows:

(a) Institutions accredited by the American zoo and aquarium association or
the zoological association of America shall be exempt from K.S.A. 2006 Supp.
32- 1302 and 32-1303, and amendments thereto.

(b) A wildlife sanctuary registered with the local animal control authority
shall be exempt from K.S.A. 2006 Supp. 32-1302, and amendments thereto.

(c) The Kansas department of wildlife and parks, or a person issued a permit
by the secretary pursuant to K.S.A. 32-952, and amendments thereto, shall be
exempt from this act.

(d) A licensed or accredited research or medical institution shall be exempt
from K.S.A. 2006 Supp. 32-1302 and 32-1303, and amendments thereto.

(e) A United States department of agriculture licensed exhibitor of dangerous
regulated animals while transporting or as part of a circus, carnival, rodeo
or fair shall be exempt from this act.

* * *

• KAN. STAT. ANN§ 32-1309. Selling or transferring animals.

Nothing in this act shall preclude a person who holds a valid United States
department of agriculture license from selling or transferring the entire
business and the dangerous regulated animals covered by such license to
another person who holds a valid United States department of agriculture
license.

* * *

• KAN. STAT. ANN§ 32-1310. Reports to the department of wildlife and parks;
registered designated handler, fee; educational training programs; rules and
regulations.

(a) Annually, on or before April 1, a local animal control authority shall
report to the secretary of the Kansas department of wildlife and parks on
dangerous regulated animals registered with the local animal control authority
during the preceding calendar year. The report shall include all registration
information submitted to the local animal control authority under subsection
(b) of K.S.A. 2006 Supp. 32-1303, and amendments thereto, and information on
enforcement actions taken under this act.

(b) It shall be a violation of this act for a person who does not own the
dangerous regulated animal, to care for, have custody or control of such
animal unless such person is a registered designated handler. Any such person
applying for a designated handler registration shall file an application on a
form prescribed by the local animal control authority. Application for such
registration shall be accompanied by an application fee not exceeding $25. If
the local animal control authority finds the applicant to be qualified to be a
registered designated handler after meeting the training, experience and
ability requirements determined by the secretary of wildlife and parks, the
local animal control authority shall issue a designated handler registration
which shall expire at the end of the calendar year.

(c) The secretary of wildlife and parks shall provide educational training
programs for the local animal control authority concerning the provisions of
this act and the handling of dangerous regulated animals.

(d) The secretary of wildlife and parks shall adopt rules and regulations:

(1) Establishing training, experience and ability requirements for registered
designated handlers; and

(2) to implement the provisions of this act.

* * *

• KAN. STAT. ANN§ 32-1311. Requirements of county resolutions or city
ordinances; compliance with act.

A county or city may adopt resolutions or ordinances governing dangerous
regulated animals that are more restrictive than this act. Such resolution or
ordinance may include, but not be limited to, additional animals to the
definition of a dangerous regulated animal, additional caging standards, and
stricter care and treatment provisions. If a county or city already has a
resolution or ordinance in existence that is substantially the same or more
restrictive, such county or city shall be in compliance with this act.

* * *

• KAN. STAT. ANN§ 32-1312. Penalty.

Any person who knowingly violates this act is guilty of a class A nonperson
misdemeanor.