# Kentucky State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

â€¢ 301 KY. ADMIN. REGS. 2:082 - Transportation and holding of exotic wildlife.

Section 1. Definition. "Exotic wildlife" means terrestrial wildlife species
which have never naturally existed in the wild in Kentucky including starling
(Sturnus vulgaris), English or house sparrow (Passer domesticus), and Eurasian
collared dove (Streptopelia decaocto).

Section 2. Prohibited Species. (1) Except as specified in subsection (3) of
this section, a person shall not import or transport through Kentucky or
possess in Kentucky the following:

> (a) Baya weaver (Plocius phillipinus);

>

> (b) Blackbirds (Genus Agelaius), except native species;

>

> (c) Cape sparrow (Passer melanurus);

>

> (d) Cowbirds (Genus Molothrus), except native species;

>

> (e) Cuckoo (Family Cuculidae), except native species;

>

> (f) Dioch or red-bellied quelea (Quelea quelea);

>

> (g) European blackbird (Turdus merula);

>

> (h) Fieldfare (Turdus pilar);

>

> (i) Flying fox or fruit bat (Genus Pteropus);

>

> (j) Gambian giant pouched rat (Cricetomys gambianus);

>

> (k) Giant, marine, or cane toad (Bufo marinus);

>

> (l) Hawaiian rice bird or spotted munia (Lonchura punctalata nisoria);

>

> (m) Jack rabbit (Genus Lepus);

>

> (n) Java sparrow (Padda oryzivora);

>

> (o) Madagascar weaver (Foudia madagascariensis);

>

> (p) Mistle thrush (Turdus viscivorus);

>

> (q) Monk or Quaker parakeet (Myiopsitta monachus);

>

> (r) Multimammate rat (Subgenus Mastomys);

>

> (s) Mute swan (Cygnus olor);

>

> (t) Nutria (Myocastor coypus);

>

> (u) Prairie dog (Cynomys spp.);

>

> (v) Raccoon dog (Nyctereutes procyonoides);

>

> (w) San Juan rabbit (Orytolagus cuniculus);

>

> (x) Sky lark (Alauda arvensis);

>

> (y) Song thrush (Turdus philomelus);

>

> (z) Starlings (Family Stumidae) including pink startings or rosy pastors
(Stumus roseus), except for Indian Hill mynahs (Graclua religiosa);

>

> (aa) Suricate or slender-tailed meerkat (Genus Suricata);

>

> (bb) Tongueless or African clawed frog (Aenopus laevis);

>

> (cc) Weaver finches (Genus Passer), except Passer domesticus;

>

> (dd) White eyes (Genus Zosterops);

>

> (ee) Wild European rabbit (also called the San Juan Rabbit) not
distinguishable morphologically from native wild rabbits;

>

> (ff) Yellowhammer (Emberiza citrinella);

>

> (gg) A member of the following families:

>

>   1. Suidae (pigs or hogs), except for domestic swine;

>   2. Viverridae (civits, genets, lingsangs, mongooses and fossas);

>   3. Tayassuidae (peccaries and javelinas).

(2) Prohibited inherently-dangerous wildlife. Except as specified in
subsections (3) and (5) of this section, a person shall not import or or
possess in Kentucky the following:

> (a) Adders or vipers (Family Viperidae and Crotalidae) (except native
species);

>

> (b) Alligators or caimans (Family Alligatoridae);

>

> (c) African buffalo (Syncerus caffer);

>

> (d) Bears (Family Ursidae);

>

> (e) Cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus);

>

> (f) Clouded leopard (Neofelis nebulosa);

>

> (g) Cobras mambas or coral snakes (Family Elapidae);

>

> (h) Crocodiles (Family Crocodylidae);

>

> (i) Elephants (Family Elephantidae);

>

> (j) Gavials (Family Gavialidae);

>

> (k) Gila monsters or beaded lizards (Family Helodermatidae);

>

> (l) Hippopotamus (Hippopotamus amphibius);

>

> (m) Honey badger or ratel (Mellivora campensis);

>

> (n) Hyenas (Family Hyaenidae), all species except aardwolves (Proteles
cristatus);

>

> (o) Lions, jaguars, leopards or tigers (Genus Panthera);

>

> (p) Old world badger (Meles meles);

>

> (q) Primates nonhuman (Order Primates);

>

> (r) Rhinoceroses (Family Rhinocerotidae);

>

> (s) Sea snakes (Family Hydrophidae);

>

> (t) Snow leopard (Uncia uncia);

>

> (u) Venomous rear-fanged species (Family Colubridae) except hognose snakes
(Genus Heterodon);

>

> (v) Wolverine (Gulo gulo); or

>

> (w) Hybrids of all species contained in this list.

(3) Upon written request, the commissioner may authorize the importation or
possession of the species listed in this section by circuses or for
legitimate-scientific or educational purposes by:

> (a) A zoo or facility that is:

>

>   1. Accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium Association ("AZA"); or

>   2. Designated as the official zoo of a municipality.

>

> (b) A government agency;

>

> (c) A college or university;

>

> (d) A licensed or accredited educational or research institution; or

>

> (e) A lawfully operated circus or rodeo; or

>

> (f) A person or organization requesting exemption for medical purposes.

(4) A person may temporarily transport or display a prohibited animal listed
in this section through the state for less than ninety-six (96) hours if at
all times the animal is maintained within a confinement sufficient to prevent
the animal from escaping.

(5) Possession of an inherently-dangerous animal prior to the effective date
of the amendment to this administrative regulation.

> (a) A person who legally possesses an inherently-dangerous animal as defined
in subsection 2 of this section prior to the effective date of the amendment
to this administrative regulation may possess the animal.

>

> (b) The person shall maintain:

>

>   1. Veterinary records;

>   2. Acquisition papers for the animal; or

>   3. Any other documents that establishes that the person possessed the
animal prior to the effective date of the amendment to this administrative
regulation.

>

> (c) A legally-possessed inherently-dangerous animal shall not be bred by a
person who does not have an exemption as established in Section 2(3) of this
administrative regulation.

>

> (d) A legally-possessed inherently-dangerous animal shall not be replaced by
a person who does not have an exemption as established in Section 2(3) of this
administrative regulation.

(6) If any inherently-dangerous animal escapes, either intentionally or
unintentionally, the owner of the animal shall immediately contact the
department to report the escape or release.

Section 3. Exotic Wildlife. Unless listed in Section 2(1) of this
administrative regulation, or otherwise protected by state or federal law,
exotic wildlife shall not:

> (1) Be classified as protected wildlife; and

>

> (2) Require a permit from the department for possession.

Section 4. Transportation Permits and Certificate of Veterinary Inspection.
(1) Prior to entry into Kentucky, an annual or individual transportation
permit as established in 301 KAR 2:081 shall be obtained for all shipments of
wildlife. Persons shall be responsible for applying for a transportation
permit who:

> (a) Receive a shipment of wildlife;

>

> (b) Import wildlife for their own use or possession; or

>

> (c) Transport wildlife into and through the state to a destination outside
Kentucky;

(2) A copy of a valid transportation permit shall accompany all shipments of
wildlife into Kentucky.

> (a) Individual transportation permits shall be valid for one (1) shipment of
wildlife.

>

> (b) Annual transportation permits shall be valid for multiple wildlife
shipments for one (1) year from the date of issue. Annual transportation
permit holders shall:

>

>   1. Notify the department in writing of any changes or additions subsequent
to the original application so that an amended permit may be issued prior to
subsequent wildlife importation; and

>   2. Notify the department by telephone Monday through Friday between 8 a.m.
and 4:30 p.m. at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to each shipment of
wildlife of the date of expected shipment; source of the shipment; and the
species being shipped.

(3) All shipments of wildlife shall be accompanied by a certificate of
veterinary inspection stating that the wildlife is free of symptoms of
disease. A federal quarantine certificate may be substituted for the
certificate of veterinary inspection.

Section 5. The following animals shall not require permits from the department
for importation:

> (1) Alpaca (Lama pacos);

>

> (2) American bison (Bison bison);

>

> (3) Breeds and varieties of goats derived from the wild goat or bezoar
(Capra aegagrus);

>

> (4) Camels (Camelus bactrianus and Camelus dromedarius);

>

> (5) Chinchillas (Chinchilla laniger);

>

> (6) Cockatoos (family Cacatuidae);

>

> (7) Domesticated races of ducks and geese (family Anatidae) distinguishable
morphologically from wild ducks or geese;

>

> (8) Domesticated races of the European rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus)
distinguishable morphologically from wild rabbits;

>

> (9) Domesticated races of mink (Mustela vison), if:

>

>> (a) Adults are heavier than 1.15 kilograms; or

>>

>> (b) The fur color can be distinguished from wild mink;

>

> (10) Domestic swine, except free-roaming or feral wild boars or wild swine;

>

> (11) Domesticated races of rats (Rattus norvegicus or Rattus rattus) or mice
(Mus musculus);

>

> (12) Domesticated races of turkeys (Meleagris gallopavo) recognized by the
American Poultry Association and the U.S. Department of Agriculture; but shall
not include captive held or bred wild turkeys;

>

> (13) Domestic yak (Bos grunniens);

>

> (14) Gerbils (Meriones unguiculatus);

>

> (15) Guinea fowl (Mumida megeagris);

>

> (16) Guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus);

>

> (17) Hamsters (Mesocricetus spp.);

>

> (18) Indian Hill mynahs (Graclua religiosa);

>

> (19) Llama (Lama glama);

>

> (20) Parrots, lovebirds, cockatiels, budgerigar, parakeets (except monk
parakeet (M. monachus), macaws (family Psittacidae);

>

> (21) Peafowl (Pavo cristatus);

>

> (22) Pigeons (Columba domestica or Columba livia) or domesticated races of
pigeons;

>

> (23) Ratites, as defined by KRS 247.870; and

>

> (24) Toucans (family Rhamphastidae);

Section 6. Applying for Permits. (1) All applications for transportation
permits shall be made on standard forms.

(2) The applicant shall indicate the source of supply of the wildlife.

(3) After the permit is issued, the permit holder shall retain a bill of sale
or other written proof to show that the wildlife was obtained from a legal
source.

(4) A permit holder shall show this written proof to a conservation officer
upon request.

(5) Applicants shall possess an approved permit before acquiring animals.

(6) Failure to provide accurate, truthful and complete information on the
application form shall result in:

> (a) Immediate withdrawal or revocation of the permit; and

>

> (b) Confiscation of the wildlife imported under the permit.

Section 7. Endangered Species. A permit shall not be issued for the
transportation or possession of federally endangered or threatened species
without obtaining prior approval from the commissioner. The commissioner may
grant approval for legitimate scientific or educational purposes for:

(1) A zoo that is:

> (a) Accredited the American Zoo and Aquarium Association; or  
(b) Designated as the official zoo of a municipality;

(2) A government agency;

(3) A college or university; or

(4) A similar educational or research institution.

Section 8. Inspections. A person holding exotic wildlife shall allow a
conservation officer to inspect the holding facilities at any reasonable time.

Section 9. Release. With the exception of pheasants and chukars, a person
shall not release exotic wildlife into the wild.

Section 10. Incorporation by Reference. (1) The following material is
incorporated by reference:

> (a) "Annual Transportation Permit Application, July 2003 edition"; and

>

> (b) "Individual Transportation Permit Application, July 2003 edition."

(2) This material may be inspected, copied, or obtained, subject to applicable
copyright law, at the Kentucky Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources, #1
Game Farm Road, Frankfort, Kentucky, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.