# Massachusetts State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• MASS. GEN. LAWS ANN. ch. 131, §77A - Propagation, dealing, etc. in fish,
birds, mammals, reptiles or amphibians; rules and regulations; licenses; fees.

Section 23. Except as otherwise provided by this section or any rule or
regulation made under the authority thereof, a person shall not engage in the
propagation, cultivation, or maintenance of, or the dealing in, fish, birds,
mammals, reptiles, or amphibians, or parts thereof, as provided in section
twenty-four, twenty-five or forty-seven, without first having obtained a
propagator's license or dealer's license, as the case may be, authorizing him
so to do. For the purpose of this section, birds, mammals, reptiles and
amphibians shall refer to undomesticated birds, mammals, reptiles and
amphibians that are wild by nature. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to prohibit the propagation, disposition, sale, possession or maintenance of
domesticated species.

The director, after a public hearing, shall make and may alter, amend, or
repeal, rules and regulations governing the possession, propagation,
maintenance, disposition, purchase, exchange, sale or offering for sale of
fish, birds, mammals, reptiles or amphibians, or parts thereof, protected by
this chapter, and may issue licenses in accordance with such rules and
regulations.

The director shall draw up a special exemption list of fish, birds, mammals,
reptiles and amphibians. Animals to be thus listed shall meet the following
criteria: (1) accidental release of the fish, bird, mammal, reptile or
amphibian will not result in an adverse effect on the ecology of the
commonwealth; (2) the animal in captivity, or escaped therefrom poses no
substantial danger to man, by either injury or disease; (3) proper care of the
animal is no more demanding in any major respect than proper care of common
domestic animals; and (4) trade in the fish, bird, mammal, reptile or
amphibian has no significant adverse effect on the wild population of such
animal in any of its natural habitats. No animal listed in any category of the
International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources' Red Data
Books shall be listed; no animal protected by either federal endangered
species law or by section twenty-six A shall be listed. The special exemption
list may be altered by the director after a public hearing. Any individual may
possess as a pet, without a license, any animal on the special exemption list,
and may continue to do so in case of subsequent removal of such animal from
the list, for the lifetime of his animal, contingent upon evidence of
acquisition of the animal while so listed.

Each license issued by the director shall specify the degree to which fish,
birds, mammals, reptiles or amphibians, or parts thereof, may be propagated,
cultivated, maintained, disposed of, or dealt in, and the section of the law
with respect to which such license is issued. For the granting of an
individual license for an animal that is not on the special exemption list,
the applicant shall satisfy the director that he can maintain in good health,
properly confine and protect the animal; if, however, depletion of the wild
population of the species is an issue, proposed acquisition of a captive-bred
animal or acquisition by a person whose ownership is likely to benefit the
species shall be given preference.

A license to possess as a pet a bird, mammal, fish, reptile or amphibian owned
prior to January first, nineteen hundred and seventy-four shall, provided that
any potentially injurious animal is properly confined in a suitable facility,
be granted at any time to any individual upon presentation of evidence of
ownership of the animal in question prior to January first, nineteen hundred
and seventy-four.

A person, club or association operating under authority of a license issued as
herein before provided shall not sell for food fish of a size prohibited by
this chapter or by any rule or regulation made under authority thereof.

The following classes of licenses may be issued under this section: -

(1) To any individual, a special propagator's license to possess, propagate
and maintain fish at any time for the personal use of himself, his immediate
family or guests; or to any club or association, or its members or guests; a
special propagator's license to possess, propagate and maintain fish at any
time for the purpose of fishing within waters under the control of such club
or association for the personal use of the members and guests thereof.

(2) To any individual, club or association, a special propagator's license to
possess, pro agate and maintain fish for the purpose of liberation into public
waters, for which there shall be no fee.

(3) To any individual, club or association, a propagator's license to possess,
propagate, maintain, buy, sell or otherwise dispose of fish at any season of
the year.

(4) To any individual, a propagator's license to possess, maintain, buy, sell,
offer for sale or have in possession for the purpose of sale, birds, mammals,
reptiles or amphibians.

(5) To any individual, club or association, a special propagator's license to
possess birds or mammals to propagate for the purpose of liberation into
covers open to public hunting, for which there shall be no fee.

(6) To any individual, a dealer's license to possess, buy, sell, or offer for
sale, fish, birds or mammals lawfully taken or lawfully propagated outside the
commonwealth or lawfully propagated within the commonwealth.

(7) To any individual, a license to possess but not to sell except under
authority of a permit from the director, authority to issue such permits being
hereby granted to the director, a bird or mammal as a pet, or for the purpose
of training dogs, or a reptile or amphibian.

(8) To any individual, a license to possess, liberate and recapture, but not
to sell except under authority of a permit from the director, authority to
issue such permit being hereby granted to the director, up to twenty-five
quail for the purpose of training dogs.

(9) To any person who successfully fulfills the license requirements as
established by the director, a falconry license, for either an apprentice
falconer, general or master falconer, depending upon the applicant's
qualifications and testing, to keep, train and hunt with raptors in accordance
with the rules and regulations established therefor, provided that when
hunting, the licensee shall also possess a valid hunting or sporting license.

(10) To any person fulfilling the requirements of this license as established
by the director, a raptor breeding license to possess and propagate birds of
the families Accipitridae, Falconidae, Tytonidae, and Strigidae in accordance
with the rules and regulations established therefor. The sport of falconry
shall be permitted under this license only for the purposes of conditioning
and training propagated raptors prior to their release to the wild or transfer
to a falconry permittee or other use as authorized by the director.

(11) To any person fulfilling the requirements of this license as established
by the director, a raptor salvage license to possess, transport, rehabilitate
and release to the wild, transfer to a falconry permittee, or other use as
authorized by the director, birds of the order Falconiformes, except species
prohibited by federal regulations, in accordance with the rules and
regulations established therefor. The sport of falconry shall be permitted
under this license only for the purposes of conditioning and training
rehabilitated raptors prior to their release to the wild, transfer to a
falconry permittee or other use as authorized by the director.

It shall be unlawful to purchase, sell, barter or offer for sale or barter, or
to have in possession for the purpose of sale or barter, any raptors licensed
under clauses (9), (10) and (11) unless otherwise authorized in writing by the
director, except that no raptors taken from the wild in the commonwealth shall
be purchased, sold, bartered or offered for sale or barter or held in
possession for such purposes.

The amounts of initial fees for licenses issued in accordance with this
section and for each annual renewal thereof shall be determined annually by
the commissioner of administration under the provision of section three B of
chapter seven for the filing thereof.

Any fish, bird, mammal, reptile or amphibian possessed, propagated,
cultivated, maintained, sold, or offered for sale in violation of this section
or of any rule or regulation made under authority thereof may be seized and
shall be disposed of by the director of law enforcement for the best interests
of the commonwealth.

* * *

• MASS. REGS. CODE tit. 321, §2.12 - _Artificial Propagation and Maintenance
of Birds and Mammals_

(1) _Purpose and Scope._ The purpose of 321 CMR 2.12 is to establish the
procedural and substantive requirements for the licensing, possession,
propagation, maintenance, and disposition of wild birds, mammals, reptiles and
amphibians. 321 CMR 2.12 is designed to protect wild animals from unnecessary
or undesirable interference and from improper treatment. 321 CMR 2.12 is also
necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare and safety when
wild animals are possessed, maintained or propagated in Massachusetts.
However, the Division recognizes that at the present time some wild animals
are being possessed, maintained, propagated or cultivated unlawfully without a
license in Massachusetts. A grace period is provided to allow all persons
unlawfully possessing wild animals 60 days from 6/30/95 during which licenses
may be issued to possess such animals for purposes other than keeping as pets.
Wild animals, regardless of whether or not they are born in captivity, often
revert to their wild nature when sexually mature and can do considerable harm
to persons. Furthermore, wild animals retained in captivity and dependent on
humans for care may not be capable of surviving in the wild if problems arise
and they are ejected by those who had attempted to care for them. The result
is an animal that may suffer a lingering fate prior to death and may be a
potential danger to the public. The purpose of 321 CMR 2.12 is to prevent not
only the potential public menace, disease, personal injury and property damage
which result when the animals are ejected, but to protect the animals from the
potential for needless or unnecessary suffering as well. Thus, the scope of
321 CMR 2.12 is to regulate:

> (a) the importation, taking from the wild, possession, propagation,
purchasing or receipt of protected animals intended to be kept by any person
in Massachusetts;

>

> (b) to define specific categories for which licenses may be issued for the
possession, maintenance, propagation or cultivation of protected wildlife;

>

> (c) to establish minimum requirements for the possession, maintenance and
artificial propagation of protected animals;

>

> (d) to establish administrative procedures for the initial issuance and
subsequent renewal of licenses, and

>

> (e) to otherwise implement the licensing provisions of M.G.L.c. 131, § 23.

321 CMR 2.12 is promulgated and effective in addition to and in conjunction
with 7 U.S.C. § 2132 et seq. as amended, commonly known as the federal Animal
Welfare Act and the licensing program of the United States Department of
Agriculture. Compliance with the requirements of the United States Department
of Agriculture does not exempt an applicant from compliance with 321 CMR 2.12
or other laws of Massachusetts. Thus, the issuance of the so-called federal
exhibitor's permit to any person other than a zoo does not exempt that person
from compliance with 321 CMR 2.12 and its licensing provisions.

2) _Definitions._ For the purposes of 321 CMR 2.12, the following words have
the following meanings:

> _Animals_ means any undomesticated bird, mammal, reptile or amphibian, that
is not the product of hybridization with a domestic form and not otherwise
contained in the exemption list found at CMR 9.01.

>

> _Class 4 - Class 8 Licenses_ means respectively licenses issued under
authority of clauses 4 through 8, M.G.L.c. 131, § 23.

>

> _Director_ means the Director of the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife or
his agents, 100 Cambridge Street, Room 1902, Boston, MA 02202.

>

> _Educational Use_ means a use or uses as contained in a course of training,
of any extent or duration, and which pertains to the acquisition, development,
or maintenance of a person's moral, intellectual, vocational, and physical
faculties, insofar as such course of training shall relate to fisheries or
wildlife, and the habitats, ecological relationships, or the environment
thereof.

>

> _Environmental Police Officer_ means the Director of the Division of Law
Enforcement, deputy directors of enforcement, chiefs of enforcement, deputy
chiefs of enforcement, environmental police officers, and such other
enforcement officers of the Division of Law Enforcement as may be appointed
pursuant to M.G.L.c. 21, § 6.

>

> _Person_ means an individual corporation, partnership, trust, association or
other private entity or any officer, agent, department or instrumentality of
the federal government or any state or its political subdivisions, including
but not limited to any agency, department, board, commission or authority
thereof.

>

> _Scientific Use_ means a use or uses concerned with the classification,
formulation verification, and documentation of various natural laws,
principles, and events by induction, deduction, hypothesis, and
experimentation, including, but not limited to, the collection, analysis,
propounding, and display of data, whether written, recorded or otherwise, and
of artifacts specimens, and similar physical samples, and shall further relate
generally to the physical world and its associated phenomena, and specifically
to those branches of systematized knowledge categorized as zoology, botany,
ecology, wildlife management, fisheries management, medicine, and veterinary
medicine, or such other skills and disciplines which shall require such use or
uses.

>

> _Wild Animal Farm_ means a person licensed pursuant to 321 CMR 2.12(10)(d).

>

> _Zoo_ means a permanent site or a permanent location where a collection of
living nondomesticated animals are maintained for regular exhibition to the
public.

(3) _Licenses._ Unless otherwise provided by law, it is unlawful for any
person to possess maintain, propagate or cultivate, sell or offer to sell any
animal without having a valid license issued to them by the Director in one of
five classes.

> (a) A class 4 propagator's license authorizes a person to possess, maintain,
propagate, buy, sell or otherwise lawfully dispose of specified birds,
mammals, reptiles or amphibians. A Class 4 license may, in addition and as a
condition of the license, allow the liberation and recapture of bobwhite quail
or ring-necked pheasant for the sole purpose of training dogs.

>

> (b) A class 5 public stocking license (including a Class 5 special
propagator's license) authorizes any individual, club or association to
possess, maintain and propagate birds or mammals for the sole purpose of
liberation into covers open for public hunting. A Class 5 public stocking
license may be issued as a Letter Permit in accordance with M.G.L. c. 131, §
4(2) and 321 CMR 2.02 but shall otherwise conform to the requirements of 321
CMR 2.12.

>

> (c) A class 6 dealer's license authorizes a person to possess or maintain
for food purposes, and to purchase, sell, offer to sell, barter, offer to
barter, or conduct commercial transactions of any nature, fish, birds, or
mammals which have been lawfully imported into Massachusetts or lawfully
propagated within Massachusetts, provided that dealing in fish shall be in
accordance with 321 CMR 4.09. A class 6 dealer's license issued for purposes
other than human food shall be issued at the discretion of the director, and
the director shall not issue such permit unless, in his discretion, such
permit is in the public interest and is not detrimental to the fish and
wildlife resources of Massachusetts or the populations of the fish and
wildlife proposed for the license, wherever found. When a fish, bird, or
mammal proposed for licensing closely resembles a fish, bird, or mammal not so
proposed, or for which a license may not be issued, or which derives from a
source not authorized pursuant to 321 CMR 2.12(16)(a), the director may
consider such similarity of appearance as constituting an adverse or
detrimental effect on such protected or non-licensed fish, birds, and mammals,
or on the enforcement of laws relating to the conservation and management of
the same, and may deny the license on such basis.

>

> (d) A class 7 possessor's license authorizes a person to possess and
maintain, but not to propagate, sell or barter, a non-exempt bird or mammal in
accordance with 321 CMR 2.12(10)(l); or a non-exempt mammal for the sole
purpose of training dogs, when such mammal was lawfully possessed and held
under a Class 7 license prior to December 31, 1994; or for the possession of a
non-exempt reptile or amphibian. After December 31, 1994, no initial Class 7
license may be issued for the purpose of possessing a non-exempt mammal for
the purpose of training dogs. A Class 7 license may be issued as a Letter
Permit in accordance with M.G.L. c. 131, § 4(2) and 321 CMR 2.02 but shall
otherwise conform to the requirements of 321 CMR 2.12.

>

> (e) A dog training license (including a Class 8 quail license) authorizes a
person to possess no more than 25 quail, six ring-necked pheasant, and two
chukar partridge to liberate and recapture for the sole purpose of training
dogs.

(4) _Application._ A person seeking a license provided for in 321 CMR 2.12(3)
shall complete a written application on forms supplied by the Director.
Completed applications shall include a self-addressed stamped envelope and be
addressed to the Permit Section, Division of Fisheries and Wildlife, 100
Cambridge Street, Room 1902, Boston, MA 02202.

(5) _Information and Requirements._ All initial license applications shall
contain the following information. Renewal license applications shall include
but not be limited to 321 CMR 2.12(5)(a), (c), (f), and (g):

> (a) the applicant's name, address and telephone number where he or she can
be reached between the hours of 9:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.;

>

> (b) the applicant's date of birth;

>

> (c) in the event the applicant is a corporation, firm, partnership,
institution or agency, either public or private, the name, address and
telephone number of the president, director, head or principal officer;

>

> (d) the location or locations where the licensed activity will be conducted;

>

> (e) the specific source or sources from which the animals are to be
obtained;

>

> (f) the date of the application;

>

> (g) the applicant's signature executed under the pains an penalties of
perjury;

>

> (h) for a class 4 license, accurate diagrams, models or drawings in scale or
pictures depicting the precise physical conditions under which the animals
will be maintained;

>

> (i) for a commercial license requested pursuant to 321 CMR 2.12(10)(c) or
(d), a signed affidavit certifying that the applicant has to the best of his
or her knowledge paid all state taxes as required by the Massachusetts
Department of Revenue; and Page 16 6/30/95

>

> (j) a written plan detailing the intended activity for which the animals are
to be maintained, the disposition of the animals if relevant, and other
information pertinent to a full explanation and justification for the
possession of the animals.

>

> (k) for a license requested pursuant to 321 CMR 2.12(10)(a), (b), (c), (d),
(f), or (g), a copy of the applicant's resume, letters of recommendation,
diplomas or certificates, and such other documentary items as shall provide
evidence of the applicant's qualifications, training, and experience in the
activity which has been applied for.

(6) _Fees._ All applications and renewals shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee indicated on the application in the form of a check or money
order payable to the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife. Cash may be used only
when the application is made in person.

(7) _Exception._ Payment of fees shall not be required of any federal, state,
or municipal agency or official, nor of any person under contract to the
Division of Fisheries and Wildlife or otherwise involved in projects conducted
or directly supervised by the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife.

(8) _Abandoned Applications._ Upon receipt of an incomplete application, an
improperly executed application, or an insufficient fee, the applicant shall
be notified of the deficiency. If the applicant fails to supply the requested
information, pay the required fee or otherwise fails to correct the deficiency
within 60 days following the date of notification, the application shall be
considered abandoned and shall be returned to the applicant.

(9) _Denials._ Applications for a license provided for in 321 CMR 2.12(3),
including both initial applications and renewals, shall, unless otherwise
provided, be denied when:

> (a) the application is for a license to possess, maintain, propagate or
cultivate animals as pets except as otherwise provided for in 321 CMR
2.12(10)(h) and (10)(i);

>

> (b) the application is for a class 4 license to possess, maintain, or
propagate animals for purposes or intentions based purely on curiosity,
impulse or novelty, or to provide for personal amusement or entertainment;

>

> (c) the applicant has within one year preceding the date of application been
criminally convicted of a violation of any provision of M.G.L. c. 131, c.
131A, any provision of 321 CMR, or any federal statute or federal regulation
which is related to the activity for which the license is sought;

>

> (d) the applicant has failed to disclose material information or has made
false statements as to any fact in connection with the application;

>

> (e) a prior inspection of the facilities where the animal will be possessed,
maintained, propagated or cultivated by a duly authorized state or federal
official has disclosed that the facilities do not meet the requirements found
in 321 CMR 2.12(11) and such deficiencies have not been corrected within 30
days;

>

> (f) the application is for a license to possess an animal in a commercial
venture involving amusement or sport; or

>

> (g) the applicant for a Class 4 license has imported into or received in
Massachusetts any animal without a valid importation license as required by
M.G.L. c. 131, §§ 19 and 19A, and 321 CMR 2.15; except that persons possessing
animals without such a license on 6/30/95 shall be allowed a 60 day grace
period from said date in which to comply.

>

> (h) the applicant has failed to satisfy the director that his
qualifications, training, and experience are sufficient to properly maintain,
propagate or care for the animals in question, or to adequately provide for
the safety and well-being of the public and the environment.

>

> (i) the applicant has failed to satisfy the director that the applicant is
actively engaged in the activity granted by the permit.

>

> (j) the application is for a class 6 dealer's license other than for
purposes of human food and the applicant has failed to satisfy the director
that the application is in the public interest and is non-detrimental to fish
and wildlife resources pursuant to 321 CMR 2.12(3)(c).

(10) _Issuance._ A Class 4 license may be issued only to applicants who
substantially document that the intended possession, maintenance or
propagation is for:

> (a) an authentic and legitimate scientific use certified by officials of a
generally recognized scientific institution such as museums of a zoological or
biological nature, zoological or biological departments of an accredited
college or university, or a public or private research institute for wildlife
population or management studies;

>

> (b) an authentic and legitimate educational use certified by zoological or
biological officials of a generally recognized educational institution such as
an accredited college or university or a public or private school;

>

> (c) a commercial use in conjunction with an applicant's primary existing
occupation or livelihood in Massachusetts and for which the animal is an
inherently necessary and an essential element;

>

> (d) commercial propagation of protected animals for sale other than sale as
pets, which shall be issued only for those species listed in 321 CMR 2.12(11).

>

> (e) an authentic use in conjunction with legitimate sporting events
involving the training of dogs;

>

> (f) animals held or propagated under holding agreements or in conjunction
with breeding programs of established zoos licensed by the United States
Department of Agriculture;

>

> (g) captive propagation of threatened or endangered animals under the
auspices of a written captive propagation program approved by both the
Director and the Fisheries and Wildlife Board, when such captive propagation
is in accordance with the recovery or action plans or recommendations of the
International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, the
American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums, or of the United
States or of Massachusetts, and, in the opinion of the director will make a
meaningful contribution to the ultimate survival and recovery of the animal.
Such captive propagation shall be restricted to genetically pure animals of
known lineage unless otherwise specified in the recovery or action plans or
recommendations.

>

> (h) the aviculture of non-exempt birds, including federally threatened and
endangered species as authorized by the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service, that are documented to be the product of captive propagation or that
were legally held prior to the approval of 321 CMR 2.12 and are members of the
following taxonomic groups: _Ciconiiformes_ (_e.g._, flamingo), _
Anseriformes_ (_e.g._, ducks, geese, swans), _Galliformes_ (_e.g._, pheasant,
quail, grouse), _Gruiformes_ (_e.g._, cranes, coots), _Columbiformes_ (_e.g._,
pigeons, doves), _Psittaciformes_ (_e.g._, parrots), _Piciformes_ (_e.g._,
toucans), _Passeriformes_ (_e.g._, songbirds). The foregoing shall not include
the Wild Turkey (_Meleagris gallopavo_) or the following potential pest
species: Pink Starling (_Sturnus roseus_), Red-billed Dioch including the
Black-fronted and Sudan Diochs (_Quelea quelea_), and Red-whiskered Bulbul
(_Pycnonotus jocosus_).

>

> (i) the propagation of non-exempt reptiles, including federally endangered
and threatened species as authorized by the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service, that are documented to be the product of captive propagation or that
were lawfully held prior to the approval of 321 CMR 2.12 on May 8, 1986, and
are members of the taxonomic groups which include turtles and lizards, except
venomous lizards in the genus _Heloderma_;

>

> (j) the propagation, maintenance, possession, purchase, and sale of American
bison (_Bison bison_) for purposes other than as a pet, when in compliance
with provisions of M.G.L. c. 129 and other requirements of the Department of
Food and Agriculture;

>

> (k) the training of animals to aid the handicapped; or

>

> (l) any protected animal lawfully possessed prior to July 1, 1980.

(11) **Commercial Propagation - Allowable Species.** Only the following
species or groups of species may be commercially propagated:

> (a) fallow deer (_Cervus dama_);

>

> (b) red deer (_Cervus elaphus_);

>

> (c) sika deer (_Cervus nippon_);

>

> (d) reindeer (_Rangifer tarandus_);

>

> (e) American bison (_Bos bison_);

>

> (f) aoudad (Barbary sheep) (_Ammotragus lervia_);

>

> (g) mouflon (_Ovis musimon_);

>

> (h) red fox (_Vulpes vulpes_), including silver fox, cross fox, and color
variants thereof;

>

> (i) Arctic fox (_Alopex lagopus_);

>

> (j) cassowaries (_Casuariidae_);

>

> (k) emus (_Dromiceiidae_);

>

> (l) rheas (_Rheidae_);

>

> (m) ostriches (_Struthionidae_);

>

> (n) pheasants, quail, partridges (_Phasianidae_);

>

> (o) waterfowl (_Anseriformes_);

>

> (p) American alligator (_Alligator mississippiensis_); and

>

> (q) federally endangered and threatened species of those groups listed in
(11), when approved by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the Director.

(12) _Exemption._ Licensed veterinarians temporarily treating sick and injured
animals are exempt from the licensing requirements provided that:

> (a) accurate records are kept on forms provided by the Director and
submitted annually not later than January 31; and

>

> (b) the Director is notified immediately of the presence of any endangered,
threatened or special concern species listed pursuant to the U.S. Endangered
Species Act or to 321 CMR 10.60.

(13) _Temporary Possession Permit._ Persons may temporarily possess animals in
Massachusetts provided a temporary possession permit is obtained from the
Division. The applicant shall supply the Division with the dates, times and
locations where the animals will be possessed, the purposes of the temporary
possession, a list of the animals being temporarily possessed and the dates of
their removal. For the purposes of 321 CMR 2.12, a temporary possession permit
may also be issued to a wild animal farm or a zoo for exhibiting animals off
the premises of such farm or zoo.

(14) _Grace Period._ Persons presently possessing, maintaining, propagating or
cultivating animals other than as pets, without a valid license or otherwise
unlawfully, will be allowed a 30 day grace period from 6/30/95 in which
applications for a license may, if submitted in accordance and in compliance
with 321 CMR 2.12 and within the 30 day period, be approved and issued by the
Director.

(15) _Inspections._ Upon submission of a properly completed application for a
Class 4 license to be issued pursuant to 321 CMR 2.12(3) or for a wildlife
rehabilitation permit issued under authority of M.G.L. c. 131, § 4, clause 2,
and all required supporting documentation, an Environmental Police Officer or
an official of the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife, or both, shall inspect
the facilities to be used by the applicant for the maintenance of the
following animals: any mammal in the order _Carnivora_ (wild cats, wolves,
bears, raccoons, weasels, and others); any mammal in the order _Proboscidea_;
any mammal in the families _Cervidae_ (deer, elk, and others) and _Bovidae_
(bison, antelope, etc.); any bird in the orders _Casuariiformes_ (emus), _
Rheiformes_ (rheas) and _Struthioniformes_ (ostriches); and any venomous
reptiles. If, upon receiving a properly completed application for a Class 4
license for any other species, the Director determines that an inspection of
the applicant's facilities is in the public interest, he may cause such
inspection to be made by an official of the Division or an Environmental
Police Officer or both. An applicant's facilities, whether or not inspected as
provided in 321 CMR 2.12(15), shall meet the following minimum requirements:

> (a) animals shall be kept in approved enclosures under conditions that give
the licensee exclusive control over them at all times and at the location(-s)
to be designated in the license, except as otherwise provided by law or the
Director;

>

> (b) approved enclosures shall be designed so as to provide adequate physical
comfort to the animal and shall:

>

>   1. keep the animal clean and dry, except for those species requiring a
moist environment;  

>   2. maintain an ambient temperature compatible with the animal's needs;  

>   3. keep the animal in complete and continuous captivity;  

>   4. restrict the entry of unauthorized persons or predatory animals;  

>   5. provide access to clean food and fresh water in clean containers; and  

>   6. sufficient fresh food and water fulfilling the animal's dietary
requirements shall be made available and shall be presented in a manner
compatible with the animal's particular eating habits;

>

> (c) maintain all enclosures in a sanitary condition and in good repair;

>

> (d) have equipment available for proper storage and disposal of waste
material to control vermin, insects and obnoxious odors;

>

> (e) take effective measures to prevent and control infection and infestation
of the animal and premises with disease, parasites and vermin;

>

> (f) provide adequate shelter for the comfort of the animal and adequate
facilities, when necessary, for isolation of diseased animals;

>

> (g) if animals are group housed, maintain animals in compatible groups
without overcrowding;

>

> (h) ensure the enclosures are adequately designed to minimize any potential
danger to the public, or to the licensee;

>

> (i) in the case of venomous reptiles, arrange for antivenin to be readily
available through a local hospital, the name, address and telephone number of
which shall be affixed to the enclosure; and

>

> (j) provide for the maintenance or disposition of all animals in case of the
licensee's absence, illness, or death.

>

> (k) comply with any special conditions or restrictions as stipulated by the
Director, pursuant to 321 CMR 2.12(16).

(16) _Restrictions._ Applications for a license issued pursuant to 321 CMR
2.12(3) shall comply with the following restrictions.

> (a) Animals may be procured in the following manner only:

>

>   1. lawfully propagated, harvested, or taken outside of Massachusetts; or  

>   2. lawfully propagated within Massachusetts; and  

>   3. unless otherwise provided for by the Director, animals taken from the
wild within Massachusetts may not be propagated, cultivated or maintained for
purposes of sale pursuant to M.G.L. c. 131, § 23.

>

> b) Birds and mammals possessed and maintained under authority of a class 5
license shall be liberated into the wild within one year under the supervision
of and in covers approved by the Director.

>

> (c) Birds and mammals sold for food purposes must first be killed and to
each carcass or part thereof shall be attached a tag furnished by the Director
at a cost to the licensee established by the Department of Administration and
Finance. This tag shall remain on the carcass or any portion thereof until the
bird or mammal is prepared for consumption

(17) _Conditions._ The Director may at any time, in writing, establish
conditions or restrictions to a license issued pursuant to 321 CMR 2.12(3) if,
in his opinion, the conditions or restrictions are necessary for the
preservation and protection of the health, welfare or safety of the citizens
of Massachusetts or of the animal.

(18) _Agreement._ All licenses issued pursuant to 321 CMR 2.12(3) shall be
signed by the licensee and such signature shall constitute:

> (a) an agreement by the licensee to fully comply with all relevant
provisions of law including but not limited to M.G.L. c. 131, c. 131A, 321
CMR, and all applicable conditions and restrictions of the license;

>

> (b) an agreement by the licensee to allow inspections at reasonable times of
the premises where the animals are kept by the Director or by an Environmental
Police Officer of the Division of Law Enforcement; and

>

> (c) liability agreement.

(19) _Amendments._ Class 4 license holders shall submit to the Director in
writing any change in protected animal stock covered by a pending application
or a current license. No change in protected animals, except in the instance
of animals giving birth, held under authority of a class 4 license may be made
until an appropriate amendment covering such change in stock is approved by
the Director. All such requested amendments and modifications shall be subject
to the provisions of 321 CMR 2.12.

(20) _Records._ Licensees shall keep and maintain for no less than two years
accurate records on forms supplied by the Division of all animals possessed
and maintained under authority of a license. Said records shall be made
available to the Director or to an Environmental Police Officer upon request.

(21) _Renewal._ Applications for renewal of any license authorized to be
renewed:

> (a) shall be filed with the Division no later than December 31 of each year;

>

> (b) shall contain any change in protected animals to be maintained;

>

> (c) shall be subject to the provisions of 321 CMR 2.12 and relevant
provisions of M.G.L. c. 131; and

>

> (d) are subject to M.G.L. c. 30A, § 13, and 801 CMR 1.00 in the event a
renewal is denied.

(22) _Suspension or Revocation._ Licenses issued pursuant to 321 CMR 2.12 may
be suspended or revoked in accordance with the relevant provisions of M.G.L.
c. 30A and 801 CMR 1.00 for:

> (a) a violation of any provision of M.G.L. c. 131 or c. 131A;

>

> (b) a violation of any provision of 321 CMR;

>

> (c) a violation of any federal statute or regulation which is related to the
activity for which the license has been obtained;

>

> (d) a violation of any condition or restriction of the license; or

>

> (e) upon the request of any Environmental Police Officer if it is determined
that the licensee's operation causes an unnecessary threat to the public
health, welfare or safety or is not in the best interest to the animal.

(23) _Effect of Suspension, Revocation, or Non-Renewal._ In the event a
license is suspended, revoked or not renewed, the licensee shall dispose of
the animals within 60 days in a manner required by the Director or in a manner
provided for by the licensee with the approval of the Director.

(24) _Prohibitions._ It is unlawful for any person:

> (a) to import, possess, maintain, propagate or have custody of in
Massachusetts any animal without a valid license issued pursuant to 321 CMR
2.12 or 2.15;

>

> (b) to falsify any license application or renewal, provide false
documentation in support of a license application or renewal or fail to
provide relevant and material information regarding a license application or
renewal;

>

> (c) to refuse to allow reasonable inspections of the premises where the
animals are kept at reasonable times by any Environmental Police Officer or by
the Director;

>

> (d) who is a veterinarian to fail to keep accurate records of the treatment
of an animal or to falsify such records;

>

> (e) who is a veterinarian to fail to notify the Director immediately of the
presence of any endangered, threatened or special concern species;

>

> (f) to keep and maintain any animal in a condition or under conditions which
do not comply with provisions of 321 CMR 2.12(15)(a) through (k);

>

> (g) to import, possess or purchase any animal which was propagated
unlawfully in or out of Massachusetts;

>

> (h) not to liberate into the wild within one year birds and mammals
possessed and maintained under authority of a class 5 license;

>

> (i) to liberate into the wild birds and mammals possessed and maintained
under authority of a class 5 license without the Director or his agent being
present or provided such opportunity, or into covers not otherwise approved by
the Director;

>

> (j) to sell a bird or mammal for food purposes which has not been killed
first and affixed with a tag furnished by the Director;

>

> (k) to remove any tag which has been affixed to the carcass of a bird or
mammal sold for food purposes at any time other than immediately prior to
preparation for consumption;

>

> (l) to violate any condition or restriction of a license issued prior to 321
CMR 2.12;

>

> (m) not to provide the Director with written notification of a change in
protected animal stock which is covered by a pending application or a current
license;

>

> (n) not to maintain for at least two years accurate records of all animals
maintained and possessed or to falsify any such record or to refuse to provide
such records upon request to any Environmental Police Officer or the Director;

>

> (o) to refuse or fail to comply with a disposal order of the Director issued
pursuant to 321 CMR 2.12(23).

(25) _Grandfather Clause._ A person licensed as a Class 4 propagator on May 1,
1995 who is commercially propagating animals pursuant to 321 CMR 2.12(10)(d)
and, in addition, who is propagating animals not listed in 321 CMR 2.12(11),
shall be allowed to continue propagation of such animals at the same site and
of the same numbers of animals as on May 1, 1995, provided that a person so
propagating white-tailed deer shall be allowed to propagate only the
individual deer in possession on May 1, 1995, and such deer shall not be
replaced when dead. Permittees shall comply with all other provisions of 321
CMR 2.12.

* * *

• MASS. REGS. CODE tit. 321, §9.01 - _Exemption List_

Pursuant to the authority granted in M.G.L. c. 131, § 23, herewith is
established a list of species which are exempt from the licensing provisions
of M.G.L. c. 131, § 23. This list includes wild (_i.e._, non-domesticated)
vertebrate animals which may be imported, sold or possessed without a permit.
Note, however, that listing below does not affect other licensing requirements
which may be applicable under Federal, State or local laws, including special
endangered species and export restrictions of other states.

(1) _Purpose._ The purpose of 321 CMR 9.01 is to list those species which are
exempt from the licensing provisions of M.G.L. c. 131, § 23, and which may be
imported, possessed, maintained, propagated, bought, sold, exchanged or
offered for sale without a license or permit from the Division. Species not
listed, or which are expressly listed as "require(s) a permit", are not exempt
from the provisions of M.G.L. c. 131, § 23.

(2) _Definitions._ For the purposes of 321 CMR 9.01 and unless the context
requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following
meanings:

> _Aquarium_ means an enclosed indoor facility or an outdoor holding facility
that lacks an inlet or outlet, or such other holding facility as approved by
the Director.

>

> _Aquarium Trade Fish_ means those freshwater fish which cannot survive year-
round in a wild environment above 30x north latitude (approximately from
Jacksonville, FL west to Ensenada, CA) or below 30x south latitude
(approximately from Puerto-Alegre, Brazil west to La Serena, Chile).
Notwithstanding the foregoing, aquarium trade fish shall also include the
goldfish (_Carassius auratus_), koi or Japanese carp (_Cyprinus carpio_), and
guppies (_Poecilia_ spp.), but shall not include tilapia (_Tilapia_ spp.)
which require a permit.

>

> _Director_ means the Director of the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife or
his authorized agent. _Division_ means the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries
and Wildlife, with principal offices at 100 Cambridge Street, Leverett
Saltonstall Building, Room 1902, Boston, MA 02202 (tel. 617-727-3151).

>

> _Domestic_ or _domesticated_ means those species listed as domestic pursuant
to 321 CMR 9.02(3).

>

> _Exempt_ or _kept without a permit_ means that the animal may be imported,
possessed, maintained, propagated, bought, sold, exchanged, or offered for
sale or exchange without a license or permit.

>

> _License_ or _permit_ means a license or permit issued pursuant to the
authority of M.G.L. c. 131, § 23.

>

> _Non-exempt_ or _require(-s) a permit_ means that the animal may not be
imported, possessed, maintained, propagated, bought, sold, exchanged, or
offered for sale or exchange except by a person holding a current and valid
license or permit.

>

> _Person_ means any individual, partnership, profit or non-profit
corporation, firm, business, or other commercial or non-commercial entity,
club, organization, or association.

>

> _Species_ means an individual or individuals of any distinct non-domestic
vertebrate animal population whose members interbreed when mature or are self-
perpetuating through the production of viable offspring and can include any
subspecies or variety of vertebrate animal.

(3) _Categorical Non-exemptions._ No species in any of the following
categories may be exempted:

> (a) Threatened or endangered species listed pursuant to the U.S. Endangered
Species Act of 1973, as amended.

>

> (b) Species listed in the Red Book(-s) of the International Union for the
Conservation of Nature.

>

> (c) Species appearing on the Massachusetts list of endangered, threatened,
and special concern species at 321 CMR 10.60.

(4) _Exemption Criteria._ Animals exempted below are believed to meet the
following criteria:

> (a) Accidental release of the fish, amphibian, reptile, bird, or mammal will
not result in an adverse effect on the ecology of the state.

>

> (b) The animal in captivity, or escaped therefrom, poses no substantial
danger to humans, either by injury or disease.

>

> (c) Proper care of the animal is no more demanding in any major respect than
proper care of domestic animals.

>

> (d) Trade in the fish, bird, mammal, reptile or amphibian has no significant
adverse effect on the wild population of such animal in any of its native
habitats.

(5) _Sources of Acquisition._ Except as provided in 321 CMR 3.05, exempt
animals may be obtained from the following sources only:

> (a) lawfully propagated within Massachusetts, or

>

> (b) lawfully taken or lawfully propagated without Massachusetts, provided
that the export, sale, or exchange of such animals is lawful in the state or
country in which animals are taken or propagated.

(6) _Liberation._ No person shall liberate or cause to be liberated any exempt
animal, except in accordance with a liberation permit issued pursuant to 321
CMR 2.15.

(7) _Quarantine._ Notwithstanding the provisions of 321 CMR 9.01(1), the
Director may examine, quarantine and destroy exempt animals and may restrict
or prohibit the importation thereof in accordance with the provisions of
M.G.L. c. 131, §§ 19, 19A, 25A, and 25B, and the penalty for violation of such
quarantine shall be as provided in M.G.L. c. 131, § 25C.

(8) _List of Fish._ All aquarium trade fish may be kept without a permit
except species categorically non-exempt pursuant to 321 CMR 9.01(3), and
except that the following species are prohibited without a permit:

> (a) Grass Carp or White Amur (_Ctenopharyngodon idella_)

>

> (b) Piranha (_Pygocentrus_ spp. and _Serrasalmus_ spp.)

>

> (c) Rudd (_Scardinius erythrophthalmus_)

>

> (d) Walking Catfish (_Clarias_ spp. and all members of the family
Clariidae). Notwithstanding the above, the fathead minnow (_Pimephales
promelas_) and the blunt-nose minnow (_Pimephales notatus_) may be kept
without a permit as a pet or for sale as a pet, but require a permit when sold
as bait fish pursuant to 321 CMR 4.09.

(9) _List of Amphibians._ All amphibians may be kept without a permit except
species categorically non-exempt pursuant to 321 CMR 9.01(3).

(10) _List of Reptiles._

> (a) _Turtles_: all species of turtles may be kept without a permit, except:

>

>   1. species categorically non-exempt pursuant to 321 CMR 9.01(3).  

>   2. Argentina or Chaco Tortoise (_Geochelone chilensis_).  

>   3. Gopher tortoises (_Gopherus polyphemus_) and all other species in the
genus _ Gopherus_.  

>   4. Pancake Tortoise (_Malacochersus tornieri_).

>

> (b) _Snakes_: All venomous snakes require a permit. The following snakes may
be kept without a permit:

>

>   1. All species of boas and pythons (family Boidae), except those species
categorically non-exempt pursuant to 321 CMR 9.01(3), and except the Emerald
Tree Boa (_Corallus caninus_), Green Tree Python (_Chondropython_ spp.),
African Rock Python (_Python sebae_), Reticulated Python (_Python
reticulatus_) and all species of Anaconda (_Eunectes_ spp.), which require a
permit.  

>   2. Shield-tailed Snakes, Sunbeam Snakes, and others in the families
Uropeltidae and Xenopeltidae.  

>   3. Worm Snakes, Thread Snakes, and others in the families Typhlopidae,
Leptotyphlopidae, and Anomalepidae.  

>   4. Snakes of the family Colubridae, as follows: Asian Rat Snakes (_Elaphe_
spp. and _ Ptyas_ spp. and _Zaocys_ spp.) _Bogetophis_ spp. Brown and Redbelly
Snakes (_Storeria_ spp.) Diadem Snakes (_Spalerosophis_ spp.) Garter and
Ribbon Snakes (_Thamnophis_ spp.) Glossy Snakes (_Arizona_ spp.) Gopher and
Pine Snakes (_Pituophis_ spp.) Green Snakes (_Opheodrys_ spp.) Ground Snakes
(_Sonora_ spp.) House Snakes (_Boaedon_ [_Lamprophis_] spp.) Kingsnakes and
Milk Snakes (_Lampropeltis_ spp.) North American Rat Snakes (_Elaphe_ spp.)
except the Black Rat Snake (_E. o. obsoleta_ other than albinistic and
leucistic individuals) which requires a permit. _Pseudaspis_ spp. _ Pseustes_
spp. Texas Indigo Snake (_Drymarchon corais erebennus_) Tropical Rat Snakes
(_Spilotes_ spp.) Water Snakes (_Nerodia_ [_Natrix_] spp.) Western Hognose
Snake (_Heterodon nasicus_)

>

> (c) _Lizards_: All chameleons (Chameontidae), the Gila Monster and Beaded
Lizard (Heloderatidae), and all Monitors (Varanidae) require a permit. The
following lizards may be kept without a permit:

>

>   1. All Skinks (Scincidae) except for the following which require a permit:
Species categorically non-exempt pursuant to 321 CMR 9.01 (3). Florida Sand
Skinks (_Neoseps_ spp.) Solomon Island Ground Skink (_Tribolonotus_ spp.)  

>   2. The following Girdle-tailed Lizards (Cordylidae) may be kept without a
permit: False Club-tailed Lizards (_Pseudocordylus_ spp.) Girdle-tailed
Lizards (_Cordylus_ spp.) Plated Lizards (_Gerrhosaurus_ spp.) Rock Lizards
(_Platysaurus_ spp.) _ Zonosaurus_ spp.  

>   3. All Teiids (Teiidae) may be kept without a permit except for the
following which require a permit: Species categorically non-exempt pursuant to
321 CMR 9.01(3). Brown Water Teiids (_Neusticurus_ spp.) _Dicrodon_ spp.
Earless Teiids (_Bachia_ spp.) Rough Teiids (_Echinosaura_ spp.) Snake Teiids
(_Ophiognomon_ spp.) Spectacled Teiids (_Gymnophthalmus_ spp.) Worm Teiids
(_Scolacosaurus_ spp.)  

>   4. The following Lacertid Lizards (Lacertidae) may be kept without a
permit: _Acanthodactylus_ spp. _Gallotia_ spp. _Lacerta_ spp. _Podarcis_ spp.
_Psammodromus_ spp.  

>   5. The following Lateral-fold Lizards (Anguidae) may be kept without a
permit: Alligator Lizards (_Gerrhonotus_ spp.) Glass Lizards (_Ophisaurus_
spp.) Slowworm (_Anguis_ spp.)  

>   6. All Gekkos (Gekkonidae) may be kept without a permit except: Species
categorically non-exempt pursuant to 321 CMR 9.01(3) and the Big Bend Gekko
(_Coleonyx reticulatus_) which require a permit.  

>   7. The following Iguanid Lizards (Iguanidae) may be kept without a permit:
Basilisks (_Basiliscus_ spp.) Collared and Leopard Lizards (_Crotaphytus_
spp.) Page 90 3/22/96 Common or Green Iguanas (_Iguana i. iguana_) False or
Spring-tailed Iguanas (_Ctenosaurus_ spp.) _ Liolaemus_ spp. New World
Chameleons (_Anolis_ spp. and _Ctenotus_ spp.) Spiny Lizards (_Sceloporus_
spp.) Tree and Bush Lizards (_Urosaurus_ spp.) _Uranoscodon_ spp. Zebra-tailed
Lizards (_Callisaurus_ spp.)  

>   8. The following Agamid Lizards (Agamidae) may be kept without a permit:
_Amphibolorus_ spp. _Calotes_ spp. _Hydrosaurus_ spp. _Pogona_ spp. Water
Dragon (_Physignathus_ spp.)  

>   9. Night Lizards (Xantusidae): All Night Lizards (_Xantusia_ spp.) may be
kept without a permit, except for the Utah Night Lizard (_Xantusia virgilis
utahensis_) which requires a permit.

(11) _List of Birds._

> (a) The following groups of birds are prohibited without a permit:

>

>   1. Species categorically non-exempt pursuant to 321 CMR 9.01(3).  

>   2. Migratory birds listed in the Code of Federal Regulations, 50 CFR
10.13.  

>   3. Any other bird native to the United States and Canada.

>

> (b) Except for species listed in 321 CMR 9.01(11)(a), the birds or groups of
birds may be kept without a permit:

>

>   1. Blue or Button Quail (_Coturnix chinensis_)  

>   2. Columbidae (pigeons and doves)  

>   3. Estrildidae (Waxbills and allies)  

>   4. Fringillidae (Finches and allies)  

>   5. Ploceidae (Weaver Finches except the Red-billed, Black-fronted, and
Sudan Diochs (_Quelea quelea_) which require a permit.  

>   6. Psittacidae (parrots and their allies)  

>   7. Ramphastidae (Toucans, Aracaris, and Toucanets)  

>   8. Sturnidae (Starlings and Mynahs, except the Rose-colored Starling (Pink
Starling or Rosy Pastor) (_Sturnus roseus_) which requires a permit.

(12) _List of Mammals._

> (a) The following mammals may be kept without a permit:

>

>   1. Four-toed (African pygmy) hedgehog (_Erinaceus albiventris_ (=_Atelerix
pruneri_)  

>   2. Chinchilla (_Chinchilla_ spp.) derived from captive stock.  

>   3. Deer Mouse and White-footed Mouse (_Peromyscus maniculatus_ and _P.
leucopus_)  

>   4. Degu (_Octodon degus_)  

>   5. Egyptian Spiny Mouse (_Acomys cahirinus_)  

>   6. House Mouse (_Mus musculus_)  

>   7. Jerboas (_Dipus_ spp.)  

>   8. Norway Rat (_Rattus norvegicus_)  

>   9. Paca (_Cuniculus_ spp.)  

>   10. Southern Flying Squirrel (_Glaucomys volans_)  

>   11. Striped hamster (_Cricetulus barabensis_), also known as the Chinese
or Siberian dwarf hamster. NOTE: the golden hamster (_Mesocricetus auratus_)
may be kept without a permit pursuant to 321 CMR 9.02.