# Maine State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• ME. REV. STAT. ANN. tit. 12 § 7235-A - Permit to possess, propagate and sell
wild birds and wild animals

1\. Issuance. The commissioner may issue a permit to a person complying with
this section, permitting that person to possess, propagate or sell wild birds
and wild animals.

2\. Fee. The fee for a 2-year permit to possess, propagate or sell wild birds
and wild animals is $25. All permits issued under this section for calendar
year 1994 are valid through December 31, 1995.

3\. Restrictions. The following restrictions apply to a person issued a permit
under this section.

  1. A ringneck pheasant or bobwhite quail, whether live or dressed, that is possessed by virtue of this permit must be identified with a permanent leg band before being removed from the premises of the permittee. This permanent leg band, supplied by the permittee, must remain attached to the bird until that bird is finally prepared for consumption.  

  2. A wild animal or part of a wild animal, which is possessed by virtue of this permit, must be identified with a securely attached tag or seal before being removed from the premises of the permittee. This tag or seal, supplied by the permittee, must remain attached to the wild animal or the part of the wild animal until the animal or part is finally prepared for consumption or manufactured into a finished product.  

  3. A permit issued pursuant to this section does not authorize the permittee to possess, propagate or sell deer, bear, moose, wild turkey, hybrid wild turkey or wild turkey-domestic turkey cross.  

  4. A permit issued pursuant to this section does not authorize a person to possess, propagate or sell any wild animal taken in accordance with sections 12 M.R.S.A. § 7501, 12 M.R.S.A. § 7502 or 12 M.R.S.A. § 7504.

4\. Exemptions. The following are exemptions to the requirements of this
section.

  1. The department is exempt from the provisions of this section.  

  2. Notwithstanding subsection 3, paragraph B, an exotic animal is not required to be identified with a tag or seal.

5\. Report of sale or transfer. Each person who is issued a permit under this
section shall report on forms provided by the commissioner the sale or
transfer of each wild bird or wild animal. The forms must be printed in
triplicate, one copy to be retained by the permittee, one copy to accompany
the bird or animal being sold or transferred and one copy to be submitted to
the commissioner on the last day of the month in which the sale or transfer
took place.

6\. Annual inventory report. Within 30 days following the end of each calendar
year, each person who is issued a permit under this section shall submit an
annual inventory report to the commissioner. The annual inventory report,
submitted on forms provided by the commissioner, must provide an accurate
inventory of the total number of wild birds and wild animals possessed by the
permittee on that date.

7\. Permit revocation for failure to report. The commissioner may revoke any
permit issued under this section if the permit holder fails to meet the
reporting requirements of subsections 5 and 6. The commissioner shall notify
the permit holder of the revocation in accordance with section 12 M.R.S.A. §
7077-C. A person whose permit has been revoked under this section may request
a hearing before the commissioner. If, after hearing, the commissioner finds
that the person met the reporting requirements of subsections 5 and 6, the
revocation is rescinded. If the commissioner finds that the person did not
meet the reporting requirements, the revocation remains in effect.

8\. Rules. The commissioner may adopt rules necessary for the proper
administration of this section, including provisions to ensure that all wild
birds and wild animals receive humane treatment and proper confinement.

9\. Exceptions. Notwithstanding subsection 3, paragraph C, a person possessing
wild turkeys, hybrid wild turkeys or wild turkey-domestic turkey crosses
acquired prior to January 1, 1995 may continue to possess those birds if that
person applies for and receives a special permit issued by the commissioner
and if that person completes an annual report on forms provided by the
commissioner.