# North Carolina State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• N.C. SESS. LAWS §153A-131 - Possession or harboring of dangerous animals.

A county may by ordinance regulate, restrict, or prohibit the possession or
harboring of animals which are dangerous to persons or property. No such
ordinance shall have the effect of permitting any activity or condition with
respect to a wild animal which is prohibited or more severely restricted by
regulations of the Wildlife Resources Commission.

* * *

• N.C. SESS. LAWS §160A-187 - Possession or harboring of dangerous animals.

A city may by ordinance regulate, restrict, or prohibit the possession or
harboring within the city of animals which are dangerous to persons or
property. No such ordinance shall have the effect of permitting any activity
or condition with respect to a wild animal which is prohibited or more
severely restricted by regulations of the Wildlife Resources Commission.

* * *

• N.C. ADMIN. CODE tit. 2, r. 52B.0212 - IMPORTATION REQUIREMENTS: WILD
ANIMALS

(a) A person shall obtain a permit from the State Veterinarian before
importing any of the following animals into this State:

> (1) Skunk;

>

> (2) Fox;

>

> (3) Raccoon;

>

> (4) Ringtail;

>

> (5) Bobcat (includes Lynx and other North and South American felines as
cougars, jaguars, etc.);

>

> (6) Coyote;

>

> (7) Marten;

>

> (8) Brushtail Possum (Trichosurus vulpecula).

(b) Permits for the importation into this State of any of the animals listed
in (a) of this Rule shall be issued only if the animal(s) will be used in a
research institute or for public display or organized entertainment as in zoos
or circuses.

(c) Camelids, all cervidae, bison, and all other bovidae other than domestic
cattle may be imported into the State if accompanied by an official health
certificate issued by an accredited veterinarian which states that:

> (1) all animals six months of age or older have tested negative for
brucellosis within 30 days prior to importation; and

>

> (2) all animals six months of age or older have tested negative for
tuberculosis within 60 days prior to importation; and

>

> (3) all cervidae meet the requirements of the Uniform Methods and Rules:
Tuberculosis in Cervidae; and

>

> (4) the herd of origin has had no brucellosis or tuberculosis diagnosed
within the past 12 months.

(d) Any species or hybrid of a mammal not otherwise covered in the
Administrative Code that is found to exist in the wild or naturally occurs in
the wild must be accompanied by a valid certificate of veterinary inspection.