# Nebraska State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

โข NEB. REV. STAT. ยง37-477 - Certain animals kept in captivity; permit
required; exceptions; rules and regulations.

(1) No person shall keep in captivity in this state any wild birds, any wild
mammals, any nongame wildlife in need of conservation as determined by the
commission under section 37-805, or any wildlife determined to be an
endangered or threatened species under the Endangered Species Act or section
37-806 without first having obtained a permit to do so as provided by section
37-478 or 37-479.

(2) Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, no person shall keep
in captivity in this state any wolf, any skunk, or any member of the families
Felidae and Ursidae. This subsection shall not apply to (a) the species Felis
domesticus, (b) any zoo, park, refuge, wildlife area, or nature center owned
or operated by a city, village, state, or federal agency, or (c) any person
who holds a captive wildlife permit issued pursuant to section 37-479 and who
raises Canada Lynx (Lynx canadensis) or bobcats (Lynx rufus) solely for the
purpose of producing furs for sale to individuals or businesses or for the
purpose of producing breeding stock for sale to persons engaged in fur
production.

(3) Any person legally holding in captivity, on March 1, 1986, any animal
subject to the prohibition contained in subsection (2) of this section shall
be allowed to keep the animal for the duration of its life. Such animal shall
not be traded, sold, or otherwise disposed of without written permission from
the commission.

(4) The commission shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations governing
the purchase, possession, propagation, sale, and barter of wild birds, wild
mammals, and wildlife in captivity.