# New Hampshire State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• N.H. REV. STATE. ANN. §207:14 - Importing and Releasing.

I. No person shall import, possess, sell, exhibit, or release any live marine
species or wildlife, or the eggs or progeny thereof, without first obtaining a
permit from the executive director except as permitted under title XVIII. The
executive director shall have the authority to determine the time period and
any other conditions governing the issuance of such permit. The executive
director may refuse to issue a permit if he determines that such issuance may
pose significant disease, genetic, ecological, environmental, health, safety,
or welfare risks to persons, marine species or wildlife.

II. The executive director shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, to
administer this section and relative to the importation, possession,
exhibition, sale or release of all marine species and wildlife, including, but
not limited to:

> (a) Size, sex, number and quantity.

>

> (b) Transportation, within or through the state of New Hampshire.

>

> (c) Sale, inspection, processing, recordkeeping and marking.

>

> (d) Method of keeping.

>

> (e) Areas of release.

>

> (f) Method of release.

>

> (g) Method of taking.

>

> (h) Permit fee schedules.

>

> (i) Appropriate definitions.

III. The executive director may establish a list of marine species or wildlife
or the eggs or progeny of such marine species or wildlife which may be
exempted from any or all of the provisions of RSA 207:14.

IV. Except where otherwise provided, any person who violates this section or
any rule adopted under this section shall be guilty of a violation and guilty
of an additional violation for each marine species or wildlife possessed
contrary to the provisions of this section.

* * *

• N.H. CODE ADMIN. R FIS 804 - POSSESSION OF WILDLIFE

PART Fis 802 GENERAL CHAPTER REQUIREMENTS

Fis 802.01 Permittee Categories.

(a) For the purposes of this chapter the permittee categories shall be as
follows:

> (1) An individual person shall be permittee category 1;

>

> (2) A propagator shall be permittee category 2;

>

> (3) An individual training and shooting permittee shall be category 3.

>

> (4) The person operating a regulated shooting area shall be permittee
category 4;

>

> (5) An exhibitor shall be permittee category 5; and

>

> (6) An aquaculturist shall be permittee category 6.

Fis 804.01 Definitions.

(a) "Cage" means an area enclosed on all sides and has a top and a bottom.

(b) "Enclosure" means an area enclosed on all sides.

Fis 804.02 Non-controlled Species - Possession.

(a) A permit to possess wildlife shall not be required for any person to
possess wildlife designated as non-controlled as specified in (b), below.

(b) For purposes of this part, the following species or groups of wildlife
shall be designated as non-controlled:

> (1) Ornamental aquarium fish, both fresh and marine that shall be kept in a
closed system;

>

> (2) Amphibians;

>

> (3) Non-venomous reptiles, except the following:

>

>>   1. Spotted turtles (Clemmys guttata);  


>>   2. Blanding's turtles (Emydoidea blandingii);  


>>   3. Wood turtles (Clemmys insculpta); and  


>>   4. Eastern box turtles (Terrapene carolina carolina);

>

> (3) The following exotic birds:

>

>>   1. Cockatiel (Nymphicus hollandieus)  


>>   2. Canaries (Serinus spp.);  


>>   3. Parrots (Psittaciformes);  


>>   4. Parakeets (Budgerigar) except Monk Parakeet (Myiopsitta monachus);  


>>   5. Mynah Birds (Acridotheres spp);  


>>   6. Finches (Estrildidae spp);  


>>   7. Pekin robin (Leiothrip lutea);  


>>   8. Weavers (Ploceidae);  


>>   9. Toucans (Ramphastidae);  


>>   10. Button quail (Turnicidae);  


>>   11. Pigeons and doves (Columbiformes), exotic; and  


>>   12. Feral pigeons (Columba domestica and C. livia);  


>>   13. Emu (Dromaius novaehollandire);  


>>   14. Ostrich (Struthis camelus);  


>>   15. Rehas (Rheidae);  


>>   16. Waterfowl, exotic migratory except mute swans;  


>>   17. Waterfowl, mallard by individuals in category 1;  


>>   18. Gallinaceous birds, except:

>>

>>>   1. Bobwhite quail, Northern (Colinus virginianus);  


>>>   2. Grouse, Ruffed (Bonasa umbellus);  


>>>   3. Grouse, Spruce (Dendragapus canadensis);  


>>>   4. Pheasant, Ring-necked (Phasianus colchicus);  


>>>   5. Partridge, Chuckar and Redleg (Alectoris chuka); and  


>>>   6. Partridge, Grey/Hungarian (Perdix perdix);

>

> (4) The following mammals:

>

>>   1. Chinchillas, domesticated, (Chinchilla spp);  


>>   2. Gerbils, domesticated;  


>>   3. Guinea Pigs, domesticated (Cavia spp);  


>>   4. Hamsters, domesticated (Cricetus cricetus);  


>>   5. Mice, domesticated (Mus musculus);  


>>   6. Rats, domesticated (Rattus norvegicus and Rattus rattus);  


>>   7. Ferrets, domesticated (Mustela putorius furo);  


>>   8. Llamas (Lama glama);  


>>   9. Alpaca (Lama pacos);  


>>   10. Pot belly pigs, domesticated;  


>>   11. Rabbits, domesticated;  


>>   12. African pigmy hedgehog;  


>>   13. Sugar glider (Petaurus breviceps);  


>>   14. Tenrec (Tenrec ecaudatus); and  


>>   15. Yak (Bos grunniens)

Fis 804.03 Prohibited Species - Possession.

(a) No person shall be issued a permit to possess wildlife that has been
designated as prohibited as specified in Fis 804.03(b).

(b) For the purposes of this part, the following species or groups of wildlife
shall be designated as prohibited:

> (1) The following invertebrates:

>

>>   1. Zebra mussel; and  


>>   2. All non-indigenous crayfish; and

>

> (2) The following fish:

>

>>   1. Walking catfish (Clarias batrachus);  


>>   2. White amur/grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella);  


>>   3. European rudd (Scardinius erythophthalmus); and  


>>   4. Round goby (Neogobius melanostomus); and

>

> (3) Monk Parakeet (Myiopsitta monachus).

Fis 804.04 Permits To Possess Wildlife.

(a) No live wildlife designated as controlled, the eggs or progeny thereof,
shall be possessed without a permit to possess wildlife or except as otherwise
permitted under RSA 207:1-a, 214:34-d and 209-A:3, IV.

(b) All species not specifically listed under the categories of non-
controlled, prohibited or controlled shall be designated as controlled and
shall require a permit to possess.

(c) The executive director shall review each application to possess and shall
make a determination as to whether such possession shall be permitted. No
permit to possess shall be issued if there is any significant disease,
genetic, ecological, environmental, health, safety or welfare risks to the
public or other wildlife species.

(d) In order to determine such a determination, the executive director shall
consider the following criteria such as but not limited to:

> (1) Life cycle;

>

> (2) Life history;

>

> (3) Reproduction habits;

>

> (4) Habitat requirements;

>

> (5) Interaction with competing species for food/habitat;

>

> (6) The ability of the species to survive or not survive in New Hampshire'
environment;

>

> (7) Geographic distribution in the wild;

>

> (8) Source of wildlife; and

>

> (9) Competition with indigenous species.

(e) No possession of wildlife shall take place until a permit is issued by the
executive director.

(f) Permits to possess wildlife as specified in Fis 804.05(a) shall expire on
December 31 of the calendar year of issuance, unless sooner revoked.

(g) The permit shall be valid only for the facilities or locations described
in the application and the permit shall not be transferable or assignable.

(h) Application for a permit to possess shall be submitted no less than 30
days in advance of the date of possession.

(i) Health certificates shall meet standards set forth by the United States
Department of Agriculture pursuant to 9 CFR, 2.78 and/or the New Hampshire
Department of Agriculture.

Fis 804.05 Controlled Species - Possession.

(a) A permit to possess wildlife shall be required for all species designated
as controlled as cited in the controlled table under (b), below.

(b) A permit shall be issued only to a person in the permittee category(ies),
as defined in Fis 802.01, and cited Table 800.2:

Table 800.2 Controlled Species Table - Possession

PERMITTEE CATEGORY

SPECIES

SCIENTIFIC NAME

Reptiles

5

All venomous reptiles

5

Blanding's turtles

Emydoidea blandingii

5

Eastern box turtles

Terrapene carolina carolina

5

Spotted turtles

Clemmys guttata

5

Wood turtles

Clemmys insculpta

Fish

1, 6

Channel catfish

1, 6

Talapia

1, 6

Hybrid striped bass

Birds

5

All native species

1,2, 5

All waterfowl, indigenous and naturalized, except

2, 3, 4, 5

Mallard

Anas platyrhynchos

2, 5

Mute Swans

Cygnus olor

Gallinaceous Birds:

1, 2, 3, 4, 5

Bobwhite Quail, Northern

Colinus virginianus

5

Grouse, Ruffed

Bonasa umbellus

5

Grouse, Spruce

Dendragapus canadensis

1, 2, 3, 4, 5

Pheasant, Ring-necked

Phasianus colchicus

1, 2, 3, 4, 5

Partridge, Chukar /Redleg

Alectoris chuka

1, 2, 3, 4, 5

Partridge, Grey/Hungarian

Perdix perdix

Mammals

5

Armadillo

5

Bat, Big Brown

Eptesicus fuscus

5

Bat, Hoary

Lasiurus cinereus

5

Bat, Red

Lasiurus borealis

5

Bat, Silver-haired

Lasionycteris noctivagans

5

Bear, Black

Ursus americanus

5

Beaver

Castor canadensis

1, 2, 5

Bison

Bison bison, B. bonasus

5

Boar , wild

Sus scrofa

5

Bobcat

Felis rufus

5

Camel

Camelus spp

5

Caribou/Reindeer

Rangifer tarandus

5

Chipmunk, Eastern

Tamias striatus

5

Coatimundi

Nasua nasua

1, 2, 4 & 5

Cottontail, Eastern

Sylvilagus floridanus

1, 2, 4 & 5

Cottontail, New England

Sylvilagus transitionalis

5

Cougar

Felis concolor

5

Coyote

Canis latrans

5

Dama Wallaby

2,5

Deer, Fallow

Dama dama

2, 5

Deer, Red

Cervuselaphus

2, 5

Deer, Sika

Cervus nippon

5

Deer, White-tailed

Odocoileus virginianus

5

Elephant

Elaphus maximus, Loredomta africans

2, 5

Elk

Cervus elephus canadenois

5

Fisher

Martes pennanti

5

Fox, Gray

Urocyon cinereoargenteus

5

Fox, Red

Vulpes vulpes

5

Genet

Genetta spp

5

Hyena

1, 2, 4 & 5

Hare, Snowshoe

Lepus americanus

5

Kinkajou

Potos flavus

5

Lemming, Northern Bog

Synaptomys borealis

5

Lemming, Southern Bog

Synaptomys cooperi

5

Leopard

Panthern umeia , P. pardus, Neofelis nebulasa

5

Lion

Panthera leo

5

Lynx

Lynx canadensis

5

Marten

Martes americana

5

Mink

Mustela vison

5

Mole, Hairy-tailed

Parascalops breweri

5

Mole, Star-nosed

Condylura cristata

5

Moose

Alces alces

5

Mouse, Deer

Peromyscus maniculatus

5

Mouse, Meadow Jumping

Zapus hudsonius

5

Mouse, White-footed

Peromyscus leucopus

5

Mouse, Woodland Jumping

Napaeozapus insignis

5

Muskrat

Odontra zibethicus

5

Myotis, Keen's

Myotis keenii

5

Myotis, Little Brown

Myotis lucifugus

5

Myotis, Small-footed

Myotis leibii

5

Opossum, Virginia

Didelphis virginiana

5

Otter, River

Lutra canadensis

5

Pipistrelle, Eastern

Pipistrellus subflavus

5

Porcupine

Erethizon dorsatum

5

Prairie Dog

Cynamys, spp.

5

Primates to include:

Chimpanzee

Pan troglodytes

Gorilla

gorilla gorilla

Orangutan

Pongo pygmaeus

Baboons

Papio spp

Spider Monkey

Ateles spp

Squirrel Monkey

Saimici spp

Capuchin

Cebus spp

Rhesus

Macaca mulatta

5

Raccoon

Procyon lotor

5

Rat, Norway

Rattus norvegicus

5

Shrew, Long-tailed

Sorex dispar

5

Shrew, Masked

Sorex cinereus

5

Shrew, Pygmy

Sorex hoyi

5

Shrew, Short-tailed

Blarina brevicauda

5

Shrew, Smoky

Sorex fumeus

5

Shrew, Water

Sorex palustris

5

Skunk, Striped

Mephitis mephitis

5

Squirrel, Gray

Sciurus carolinensis

5

Squirrel, Northern Flying

Glaucomys sabrinus

5

Squirrel, Red

Tamiasciurus hudsonicus

5

Squirrel, Southern Flying

Glaucomys volans

5

Tiger

Panthera tigeris

5

Two-Toed Sloth

Choloepus didaclybus

5

Vole, Meadow

Microtus pennsylvanicus

5

Vole, Northern Red-backed

Clethrionomys gapperi

5

Vole, Rock

Microtus chrotorrhinus

5

Vole, Woodland

Microtus pinetorum

5

Weasel, Least

Erminea rixosa

5

Weasel, Long-tailed

Mustela frenata

5

Weasel, Short-tailed

Mustela erminea

5

Woodchuck

Marmota monax

5

Wolf

Canis lupus