# New Jersey State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• N.J. ADMIN. CODE tit. 7, §25-4.8 \- Potentially dangerous species

(a) "Potentially dangerous species" is defined as any exotic mammals, birds,
reptiles or amphibians or nongame species which, in the opinion of the
Division, is capable of inflicting serious or fatal injuries or which has the
potential to become an agricultural pest or a menace to the public health or
indigenous wildlife populations, including, but not limited to the following:

Class/Order

Family/Genus

Primates

Cebidae - New World Monkeys

Cercophithecidae - Old World Monkeys and Baboons

Pongidae - Apes

Carnivora

Canidae - Nondomestic dogs

Ursidae - Bears

Felidae - Nondomestic cats

Saura (Venomous)

Helodermatidae - Gila Monsters

Serpentes (Venomous)

Elapidae - Coral snakes and cobras

Viperidae - Vipers

Crotalidae - Pit Vipers

Crocodilia

Alligatoridae - Alligators and caiman

Crocodylidae - crocodiles

Gavialidae - gavials

Psittaciformes

Psittaculis spp. - Ring-necked parakeets

Myiopsitta spp. - Monk parakeets

Cyanoliseus patagonus - Patagonian Conures

Rodentia

Cynomys spp. - Prairie dogs

Spermophilus spp. - Ground Squirrels

(b) The Department, in its discretion, may issue a permit for possession of a
potentially dangerous species only after a clear showing that the criteria for
the possession of such potentially dangerous species contained in N.J.A.C.
7:25-4.9 have been met.

* * *

• N.J. ADMIN. CODE tit. 7, §25-4.9 \- Criteria for the possession of
potentially dangerous species

(a) In addition to the general criteria enumerated above in N.J.A.C. 7:25-4.7,
every person applying for a permit to possess potentially dangerous species
shall meet each and every of the following criteria to the satisfaction of the
Division.

1\. Education and Background: Persons wishing to apply for a permit to possess
a potentially dangerous species must have extensive experience in maintaining
the species desired or related species.

2\. Knowledge: Persons wishing to apply for a permit to possess potentially
dangerous species must demonstrate a working knowledge and expertise in
handling and caring for each of the species desired.

3\. Protection of the Public: The housing facilities shall also be constructed
to prevent public access to and contact with the animal. The potentially
dangerous species shall not be kept as a pet, for hobby purposes or in
situations, which, in the judgment of the Department, could adversely affect
the health of the animal or which could constitute a hazard to the public.

4\. Purpose and Intent: Persons applying to possess potentially dangerous
species must submit a written statement of the purpose and intent of keeping
the species.

5\. Housing and Feeding: Persons applying for a permit to possess a
potentially dangerous species must supply a written description of the housing
and caging facilities for the species required. A summary must be submitted of
a continuous source of food for the specific diet of the animals. Division
personnel may inspect the completed facilities to determine if the facilities
are suitable for the animal. Facilities must be constructed to prevent the
possible escape of the animal.

6\. Other restrictions: Under no circumstances shall a person issued a pet
shop or animal dealer permit possess any potentially dangerous species on the
commercial premises, except in emergencies and for a limited period of time as
stipulated by the Department in writing and subsequently agreed to by the
animal dealer or pet shop owner, who shall assume full responsibility for the
safety and welfare of both the animal and the public during its temporary
storage. A potentially dangerous animal already on display at the premises of
a pet shop or animal dealer and already under a permit for such display as of
January 17, 1995 may remain so displayed under the terms and conditions of
that permit for the lifetime of that animal.