# Nevada State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• NEV. ADMIN. CODE ch. 503, §110 - Restrictions on importation, transportation
and possession of certain species.

1\. Except as otherwise provided in this section and NAC 504.486, the
importation, transportation or possession of the following species of live
wildlife or hybrids thereof, including viable embryos or gametes, is
prohibited:

(a) Fish:

Common Name

Scientific Classification

(1) Lampreys

All species in the family Petromyzontidae

(2) Freshwater stingray

All species in the family Potamotrygonidae

(3) Freshwater shark

All species in the genus Carcharhinus

(4) Bowfin

Amia calva

(5) Gars

All species in the family Lepisosteidae

(6) Herring and shad, except threadfin shad

All species in the family Clupeidae, except Dorosoma petenense

(7) European Whitefish

All species in the genus Leuciscus

(8) Mexican banded tetra

Astyanax mexicanus

(9) Piranhas

All species in the genera Serrasalmus, Serrasalmo, Pygocentrus, Teddyella,
Rooseveltiella and Pygopristis

(10) South American Parasitic Catfish

All species in the family Cetoposidae and Trichomycteridae

(11) White perch

Morone americana

(12) Freshwater drum

Aplodinotus grunniens

(13) Grass carp, except certified triploids as authorized by a special permit

Ctenopharyngodon idella

(14) Pike top minnow

Belonesox belizanus

(15) Snakehead

All species in the genera Ophicephalus and Channa

(16) Walking catfish

All species in the genera Clarias, Heteropneustes and Dinotopterus

(17) Tiger fish

Hoplias malabaricus

(18) Sticklebacks

All species in the genera Apeltes, Eucalia, Gasterosteus and Pungitius

(19) Tilapia

All species in the genera Tilapia and Sarotherodon

(20) Nile perch

All species in the genera Lates and Luciolates

(21) Goldeye

All species in the genus Hiodon

(22) Carp:

(I) Bighead

Hypophthalmichthys nobilis

(II) Black (snail)

Mylopharyngodon pisceus

(III) Crucian

Carassius carassiuss

(IV) Indian

Catla catla, Cirrhina mrigala and Labeo rohita

(V) Silver

Hypophthalmichthys molitrix

(23) Rudd

Scardinius erythrophthalmus

(b) Reptiles:

Common Name

Scientific Classification

(1) Alligators and caimans

All species in the family Alligatoridae

(2) Crocodiles

All species in the family Crocodylidae

(3) Gharial (gavial)

All species in the family Gavialidae

(4) Bird snake

All species in the genus Thelotornis

(5) Boomslang

Dispholidus typus

(6) Keelbacks

All species in the genus Rhabdophis

(7) Burrowing Asps

All species in the family Atractaspidae

(8) Coral snakes, cobras, kraits, mambas and Australian elapids

All species in the family Elapidae, except species in the subfamily
Hydrophiinae

(9) Pit vipers and true vipers, except species indigenous to Nevada

All species in the family Viperidae, except species indigenous to Nevada

(10) Snapping Turtles

All species in the family Chelydridae

(c) Amphibians:

Common Name

Scientific Classification

(1) Clawed frogs

All species in the genus Xenopus

(2) Giant or marine toads

Bufo horribilis, Bufo marinus and Bufo paracnemis

(d) Mammals:

Common Name

Scientific Classification

(1) Wild Dogs or Dhole

Cuon alpinus

(2) Raccoon Dog

Nyctereutes procyonoides

(3) Mongooses and Meerkats

All species in the genera Atilax, Cynictis, Helogale, Mungos,
Suricate,Ichneumia and Herpestes

(4) Wild European Rabbit

Oryctolagus cuniculus

(5) Multimammate Rat or Mouse

All species in the genus Mastomys (=Praomys)

(6) Bats

All species in the order Chiroptera

(7) Nutria

Myocastor coypus

(8) Coyote

Canis latrans

(9) Foxes

All species in the genera Vulpes, Fennecus, Urocyon, Alopex, Lycalopex and
Pseudalopex

(10) Raccoon

Procyon lotor

(11) Skunk

All species in the genera Spilogale, Mephitis and Conepatus

(12) Wild pigs and hogs

All species in the family Suidae, except domestic breeds of Sus scrofa

(13) Axis deer

Cervus (=Axis) axis, C. porcinus, C. kuhli and C. calamianesis

(14) Red deer, elk and wapiti

All subspecies of Cervus elaphus, except those members of C. Elaphus nelsoni
which are alternative livestock, as that term is defined in NRS 501.003

(15) Rusa deer

Cervus timorensis

(16) Sambar deer

Cervus unicolor

(17) Sika deer

Cervus nippon

(18) Roe deer

Capreolus capreolus and C. pygarus

(19) White-tailed deer

Odocoilus virginianus

(20) Moose

Alces alces

(21) Reedbucks

All species in the genus Redunca

(22) Oryx and Gemsbok

All species in the genus Oryx

(23) Addax

Addax nasomaculatus

(24) Blesbok, Topi and Bontebok

All species in the genus Damaliscus

(25) Hartebeests

All species in the genera Alcelaphus and Sigmoceros

(26) Wildebeest and Gnus

All species in the genus Connochaetes

(27) Chamois

Rubicapra rubicapra and R. pyrenaica

(28) Tahr

All species in the genus Hemitragus

(29) Ibex, Wild Goats, Tur and Markhor

All species in the genus Capra, except domestic goats, Capra hircus

(30) Barbary (Aoudad) Sheep

Ammotragus lervia

(31) Mouflon sheep, Urial, Bighorn and Argali

All species in the genus Ovis, except domestic sheep, Ovis aries

(e) Birds:

Common Name

Scientific Classification

(1) Pink Starling or Rosy Pastor

Sturnus roseus

(2) Red-billed Dioch

Quelea quelea

(3) Red-whiskered Bul-bul

Pycnonotus jososus

(f) Crustaceans:

Common Name

Scientific Classification

(1) Asiatic mitten crab

Eriocheir sinensis

(2) Crayfish

All species in the families Parastacidae, ambaridae and Astacidae, except
Procambarus clarkii, Orconectes causii and indigenous species of the genus
Pacifastacus

(g) Mollusks:

Common Name

Scientific Classification

(1) African giant snail

Achatina fulica

(2) Zebra mussel

Dreissena polymorpha

2\. The office in Reno and each regional office of the division will maintain
a physical description and picture of each species listed in this section when
reasonably available.

3\. The division may issue a permit or license for the importation,
transportation or possession of a species listed in this section only to:

> (a) A zoo or aquarium which is an accredited institutional member of the
American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums.

>

> (b) A person who displays, exhibits or uses the species for entertainment or
commercial photography, such as motion pictures, still photography or
television, if the species:

>

>> (1) Is accompanied by evidence of lawful possession;

>>

>> (2) Is not in this state for more than 90 days; and

>>

>> (3) Is maintained under complete control and prohibited from coming into
contact with members of the general public. If the person is displaying,
exhibiting or using mammals for commercial purposes other than for food or
fiber, he must possess the appropriate license issued by the United States
Department of Agriculture.

>

> (c) A college, university or governmental agency, for scientific or public
health research.

>

> (d) Any other scientific institution, as determined by the division, for
research or medical necessity.

>

> (e) Any person engaged in commercial aquaculture, upon application and proof
to the division that the activity will not be detrimental to aquatic life,
other wildlife or recreational uses. As a condition of the issuance to such a
person of a license for the possession of a species listed in this section, a
bond may be required to provide for the removal of any species to which the
licenses applies that may escape or be released from captivity for any reason.
The amount of the bond will be determined by the division after considering
the degree of potential hazard to wildlife.

>

> (f) A tax-exempt nonprofit organization that exhibits wildlife solely for
educational or scientific purposes.

4\. An interstate shipment of a species listed in this section may be
transported through this state, without a permit or license issued by the
division, if:

> (a) The shipper or transporter has evidence of lawful possession of the
species issued by the state or country where the species originated;

>

> (b) Mammals, birds or fish are accompanied by a health certificate issued by
the state or country where the species originated that indicates the
destination, origin and proof of ownership of the species being transported;

>

> (c) The species is in this state for less than 48 hours; and

>

> (d) The species is not unloaded or otherwise released while being
transported through this state.

5\. This section does not apply to the division when it is conducting
authorized introductions or transplantations of a native species of big game
animal listed in this section.

* * *

• NEV. ADMIN. CODE ch. 503, §140 - Species for which certain permits and
licenses are not required: Specification; release; sale; exceptions.

1\. Except as otherwise provided in subsection 4 and NAC 503.500 to 503.535,
inclusive, the following animals may be possessed, transported, imported and
exported without a permit or license issued by the division:

> (a) Canaries;

>

> (b) Toucans;

>

> (c) Lovebirds;

>

> (d) Nonindigenous house finches;

>

> (e) Parakeets;

>

> (f) Cockatiels;

>

> (g) Mynah birds;

>

> (h) Parrots;

>

> (i) Hamsters;

>

> (j) Domesticated races of rats and mice;

>

> (k) Gerbils;

>

> (l) Guinea pigs;

>

> (m) Monkeys and other primates;

>

> (n) Aquarium fish;

>

> (o) Marsupials;

>

> (p) Elephants;

>

> (q) All felines, except mountain lions and bobcats;

>

> (r) Wolves;

>

> (s) Camels (Camelus spp.);

>

> (t) European ferret (Mustela putorius);

>

> (u) Llamas (Lama glama);

>

> (v) American Bison;

>

> (w) Marine mammals;

>

> (x) Ostrich (Struthio spp.);

>

> (y) Emus (Dromiceius spp.);

>

> (z) Rheas (Rhea spp.);

>

> (aa) Nonvenomous, nonindigenous reptile species and subspecies;

>

> (bb) Albino forms of indigenous reptile species;

>

> (cc) Alpaca (Lama pacos);

>

> (dd) Guinea fowl (Numida meleagris);

>

> (ee) Old World species of pheasants, partridges, quails, francolin, peafowl
and jungle fowl (nonendemic species of the subfamily Phasianae), except:

>

>> (1) Chukar partridge;

>>

>> (2) Hungarian (gray) partridge;

>>

>> (3) Snow cock; and

>>

>> (4) Ring-necked and white, winged pheasant;

>

> (ff) Domesticated races of turkey (Meleagris gallopavo), distinguished
morphologically from wild birds;

>

> (gg) Domesticated races of ducks and geese (Anatidae), distinguished
morphologically from wild birds;

>

> (hh) Domesticated races of chinchillas;

>

> (ii) Domesticated races of mink;

>

> (jj) Waterfowl reared in captivity that are lawfully acquired pursuant to
the regulations adopted by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service;

>

> (kk) Those species of ducks, geese and swans not listed as protected
pursuant to the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, 16 U.S.C. §§ 703 et seq.;

>

> (ll) Yak (Bos grunniens);

>

> (mm) Cassowary;

>

> (nn) Coturnix quail (Coturnix coturnix);

>

> (oo) Zebra (Equus spp.);

>

> (pp) Salt water fish, crustaceans and mollusks;

>

> (qq) Nonindigenous species of amphibians, except:

>

>> (1) Bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana); and

>>

>> (2) Species listed in NAC 503.110;

>

> (rr) African pygmy hedgehogs (Atelerix albiventris); and

>

> (ss) California kingsnakes (Lampropeltis getulus californiae) that do not
have between their head and vent a continuous pattern of bands or rings
regardless of whether the bands or rings are opened or closed.

2\. Species listed in this section must not be released into the wild, except
as otherwise authorized by the division in writing.

3\. Except as otherwise provided in subsection 4, lawfully acquired species
listed in this section may be sold in Nevada.

4\. This section does not authorize the sale, possession, transportation,
importation or exportation of animals in violation of any applicable federal
or state law, county or city ordinance, or any regulation adopted pursuant
thereto.

5\. As used in this section, "aquarium fish" includes all the species of fish,
except the species listed in NAC 503.110, which are listed in H. Axelrod and
W. Vorderwinkler, Encyclopedia of Tropical Fishes, 29th ed., 1988. A copy of
that publication may be obtained from T.F.H. Publications, Inc., One T.F.H.
Plaza, Neptune City, New Jersey 07753, for a price of $17.59.

* * *

• NEV. ADMIN. CODE ch. 504, §488 - Possession of live animals under authority
of permit or license held on February 28, 1994.

A person who, on February 28, 1994, holds any permit or license issued by the
division that authorizes the possession of a live animal may, except as
otherwise provided in the particular permit or license, continue to possess
that animal and its progeny for the life of that animal and its progeny. The
animal and its progeny:

1\. Must not, if the animal is of a species listed in NAC 503.110, be
released, sold, bartered, given away or traded within this state.

2\. Must not, if the animal is not of a species listed in NAC 503.110, be:

> (a) Released in this state without the prior written authorization of the
division; or

>

> (b) Sold, bartered, given away or traded within this state except:

>

>> (1) Pursuant to the conditions set forth in the permit or license under
which the animal and its progeny are held; and

>>

>> (2) To a person who holds a commercial or noncommercial license for the
same species.

3\. May be exported out of this state pursuant to applicable federal and state
laws and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto.