# Ohio State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

โข OHIO ADMIN. CODE ยง901: 1-17-12 \- Nondomestic animals

(A) No nondomestic animal shall be imported into the state of Ohio unless:

> (1) It is in full compliance with all other state and federal agencies
[_sic_] rules and regulations; and

>

> (2) It is free of evidence of any contagious or infectious diseases or
parasites harmful to humans or animals.

(B) Nondomestic animals may be legally imported into the state under all of
the following conditions:

> (1) Animals are accompanied by an entry permit and certificate of veterinary
inspection, and

>

> (2) Test-negative animals that have been exposed to test-positive animals
through transportation or husbandry practices will be allowed entry into Ohio
only by permission of chief, division of animal industry and with a consignee
letter of consent.

>

> (3) Animals are accompanied by documentation to prove they had been legal
residents in the state or country of origin (i.e., license numbers of
appropriate state and federal permits or tenure status on certificate of
veterinary inspection).

(C) Qualifications, specific tests, or statements required for mammals prior
to entry into the state:

> (1) Brucellosis

>

> Animals may move on a brucellosis free herd status that is acceptable to the
chief of the division of animal industry or on negative test results from an
approved state/federal brucellosis laboratory conducted within thirty days
prior to entry. This requirement includes but is not limited to the following
categories of animals over six months of age:

>

>> Cervidae: Elk, caribou, moose, deer (including but not limited to fallow,
roe, axis, sika, red, and white tail)

>>

>> Bovidae: Antelope, wild cattle, buffalo, wild goats

>>

>> Suidae: Wild swine including peccaries

>

> (2) Tuberculosis (mycobacterium bovis)

>

> Animals may move on a tuberculosis free herd status that is acceptable to
the chief of the division of animal industry or have a negative test which was
conducted within sixty days of entry or in accordance with the stipulation on
the permit. Eligible species would include but not be limited to the following
categories of animals over six months of age:

>

>> Buffalo

>>

>> Elk (cervus canadenis)

>>

>> Caribou (rangifer spp.)

>>

>> Wild cattle

>>

>> Deer (including but not limited to fallow, roe, axis, sika red,and white
tail)

>

> (3) Pseudorabies

>

> Official pseudorabies serologic tests must be negative within thirty days
prior to entry. Breeding animals must be held in isolation and post entry
tested twenty-one to forty-five days after the import date. This requirement
includes but is not limited to the following categories of animals except for
suckling piglets accompanying a negative saw:

>

>> Suidae: Wild swine

>>

>> Tayassuidae: Peccarie

>

> (4) Equine infectious anemia

>

> Equidae, except suckling foals accompanied by a negative dam, must be
negative to an official equine infectious anemia serological test conducted in
a laboratory approved by United States Department of Agriculture - animal
plant health inspection service within twelve months prior to entry. This
requirement includes but is not limited to the following categories of wild
equidae, except suckling foals accompanying a negative dam:

>

>> Equidae: All wild horses, wild donkeys, and zebra

(D) Qualifications, specific tests, or statements required for birds prior to
entry into Ohio:

> (1) Pullorum and fowl typhoid

>

>> (a) Commercial gamebirds, including, but not limited to bobwhite, quail,
coturmix quail, pure or hybrid ring-neck pheasant, chukar, hungarian
partridge, wild turkey, ratites, and their eggs, unless going directly to
slaughter or a ratite feedlot for slaughter, must originate from a producer
who is participating in the pullorum-fowl typhoid control phase of the
national poultry improvement plan or the birds must test serologically
negative for pullorum and fowl typhoid within the past thirty days.
Aforementioned birds (excluding turkeys) imported for a sale, swap, or show
may be tested as negative upon arrival. Negative serologic tests for pullorum
and fowl typhoid are required within thirty days from the entire breeder flock
who imports eggs and hatching birds and is not a participant in the national
poultry improvement plan.

>>

>> (b) In lieu of pullorum and fowl typhoid testing for doves, pigeons, and
certain other birds, the following statement can be placed on the health
certificate: "To my knowledge, birds listed herein are not infected with
pullorum or fowl typhoid and have not been exposed to birds infected with
pullorum or fowl typhoid during the past twelve months." This statement should
be signed by the owner or the owner's representative.

>

> (2) Mycoplasmosis

>

> Wild turkeys of the species melagris gallopavo and their eggs, unless going
directly to slaughter, must originate from a producer who is participating in
the mycoplasmosis control phase of the national poultry improvement plan or
the birds must have tested serologically negative for mycoplasma
gallisepticum, mycoplasma meleagridis, and m. Synoviae within the past thirty
days. In the case of eggs, the breeder flock must be a national poultry
improvement plan participant or must have tested negative, in the past thirty
days.

>

> (3) Newcastle disease

>

> The statement "to my knowledge, birds listed herein are not infected with
Newcastle disease or chlamydia and have not been exposed to birds known to be
infected with newcastle disease within the past thirty days," shall be written
on the health certificate of all psittacine birds entering the state and be
signed by the owner or the owner's representative.