# Pennsylvania State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• 34 PA. CONS. STAT. ANN. §2961 - Definitions

The following words and phrases when used in this subchapter shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:

"Educational purposes." Displays by or for public or private schools,
sportsmen's organizations, youth organizations, civic associations,
conservation camps and school or any other organization deemed appropriate by
the commission.

"Exotic wildlife." The phrase includes, but is not limited to, all bears,
coyotes, lions, tigers, leopards, jaguars, cheetahs, cougars, wolves and any
crossbreed of these animals which have similar characteristics in appearance
or features. The definition is applicable whether or not the birds or animals
were bred or reared in captivity or imported from another state or nation.

"Exotic wildlife dealer." Any person who imports into this Commonwealth,
possesses, buys, sells, locates or finds for a fee, barters, donates, gives
away or otherwise disposes of more than one bird or one animal classified as
exotic wildlife by this subchapter.

"Menagerie." Any place where one or more wild birds or wild animals, or one or
more birds or animals which have similar characteristics and appearance to
birds or animals wild by nature, are kept in captivity for the evident purpose
of exhibition with or without charge.

* * *

• 34 PA. CONS. STAT. ANN. §2963 - Exotic wildlife possession permits

(a) Authorization. - The commission may issue permits to persons to possess
exotic wildlife which shall authorize the holder to purchase, receive or
possess exotic wildlife from any lawful source from within or without this
Commonwealth.

(b) Shelter, care and protection. - No permit provided for in this section
shall be granted until the commission is satisfied that the provisions for
housing and caring for such exotic wildlife and for protecting the public are
proper and adequate and in accordance with the standards established by the
commission.

(c) Unlawful acts. - It is unlawful for any person to:

> (1) Possess, purchase or receive exotic wildlife, without first securing a
permit to possess exotic wildlife issued under this section or regulations
pertaining to this section.

>

> (2) Release exotic wildlife into the wild.

>

> (3) Fail to exercise due care in safeguarding the public from attack by
exotic wildlife.

>

> (4) Recklessly engage in conduct which places or may place another person in
danger of attack by exotic wildlife.

(d) Penalty. -

> (1) A violation of this section relating to permits is a summary offense of
the third degree.

>

> (2) Any other violation of this section is a summary offense of the fifth
degree.

>

> (3) Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense, but under no
circumstances shall the accumulated penalty for purposes of a field receipt
exceed $300. There shall be no limit on any accumulated penalty a court may
assess.

(e) Discretion of director. - In addition to the penalties provided, the
director may, for any violation of this section, revoke or suspend any permit
and order the disposal of any exotic wildlife held.

* * *

• 58 PA. Code §137.1. Importation, possession, sale and release of certain
wildlife.

(a) Unless otherwise provided in this section or the act, it is unlawful for a
person to import, possess, sell, offer for sale or release within this
Commonwealth the following wild animals or wild birds or the eggs of the birds
or a crossbreed or hybrid of the wild animals or wild birds, which are similar
in appearance:

> (1) In the family Felidae. Species and subspecies, except species which are
commonly called house cats which may be possessed but not released into the
wild. Lawfully acquired bobcats-Lynx rufus-may be imported or possessed, or
both, by licensed propagators specifically for propagation for fur farming
purposes. Importation permits and transfer permits as mentioned in subsections
(d) and (e) are not required for bobcats imported for propagation for fur
farming purposes. Bobcats imported under this exception and their progeny may
not be sold or transferred for wildlife pet purposes or released into the
wild.

>

> (2) In the family Canidae. Species and subspecies of the coyote, the red and
gray fox and a full-blooded wolf or crossbreed thereof not licensed by the
Department of Agriculture. Lawfully acquired coyotes and red or gray foxes may
be imported or possessed, or both, by licensed propagators specifically for
propagation for fur farming purposes. Coyotes and red and gray foxes imported
under this exception and their progeny may not be sold or transferred for
wildlife pet purposes or released into the wild. This subsection does not
permit the sale for release or the release of the mammals into the wild.

>

> (3) In the family Ursidae. All species of the bears.

>

> (4) In the family Procyonidae. All species of raccoons.

>

> (5) In the family Capromyidae. The nutria.

>

> (6) In the family Mustelidae. All species of the skunks.

>

> (7) The order Primates. All families of nonhuman primates.

>

> (8) An animal, bird or egg of a bird listed by the Commonwealth or the
United States Department of the Interior as threatened, endangered or
injurious.

>

> (9) The Monk Parakeet, Myiopsitts monachus, sometimes referred to as the
Quaker Parakeet or Gray-headed Parakeet.

>

> (10) Game or wildlife taken alive from the wild, except the Commission may
import wildlife taken from the wild for enhancement of this Commonwealth's
wild fauna.

>

> (11) Game or wild held captive. Game or wildlife held in captivity or
captive bred in another state or nation.

(b) Nothing in this section prevents a Nationally recognized circus from
temporarily bringing wildlife into this Commonwealth in connection with
presenting circus performances.

(c) Nothing in this section prevents zoological gardens from importing
wildlife.

(d) A person wishing to import lawfully acquired wildlife, or parts thereof,
shall first obtain an importation permit from the Commission subject to the
following:

> (1) Importation permits will be issued for a fee of $50 for each
transaction.

>

> (2) A person wishing to import wildlife for a menagerie, exotic wildlife
possession, exotic wildlife dealer or propagation purposes shall be in
possession of a menagerie, exotic wildlife possession, exotic wildlife dealer
or propagation permit prior to submitting the application for an import
permit. See Chapter 147 (relating to special permits).

>

> (3) An application for an importation permit shall state the name and
address of the applicant, name and address of the person supplying the
wildlife, the common and scientific name and the number of wildlife to be
covered by the permit, the purpose for which the wildlife is being imported,
the qualifications of the applicant to use the wildlife for the stated purpose
and the location where the wildlife will be housed or retained.

>

> (4) Menagerie permittees who also possess a USDA Class C Exhibitor permit
and who operate a menagerie facility as their primary means of making a
livelihood, are exempt from the possession prohibition of this section, and
may import lawfully acquired wildlife pursuant to an importation permit.

(e) Transfer of wildlife imported under subsection (d), or its progeny, or
parts thereof, to a second party by sale, trade, barter or gift may only be
done subject to the following:

> (1) A permit issued by the Commission is required to transfer by sale,
trade, barter or gift, wildlife or its progeny, or a part thereof.

>

> (2) The fee for a transfer permit is $50.

>

> (3) Transfer is limited to persons authorized to lawfully import wildlife.

(f) Live wildlife imported for any reason shall be accompanied by a
certificate of veterinary inspection signed by an accredited veterinarian.