# Rhode Island State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• R.I. GEN. LAWS §4-18-3 - Permit required to import wild animals.

No person shall import into, receive, or possess in this state without first
obtaining a permit from the department, animals of the following orders,
families, and genera: Primates, carnivores, amphibia, reptilia, canidae, and
insecta. The director may by regulation designate additional orders, families,
genera, or species requiring a permit to import, receive or possess; or the
director may by regulation waive the permit requirement for specific species,
orders, families and genera.

* * *

• 1994 R.I. PUB. LAWS 12 020 030

SECTION 1.00 ADMINISTRATIVE FINDINGS AND POLICY

1.01 AUTHORITY - These rules and regulations are adopted pursuant to authority
provided under Rhode Island General Laws ("R.I.G.L.") 42-35, 42-17 and 4-18-9
for the purpose of safeguarding the protection of persons in the State of
Rhode Island from disease hazards and physical harm associated with imported
wild animals. Issues not addressed in these rules and regulations or for which
a party seeks clarity are to be construed in light of Chapter 4-18. These
rules and regulations shall become effective twenty (20) days after filing.

1.02 ADMINISTRATIVE FINDINGS - Certain wild animals pose a substantial threat
to the safety of the people of Rhode Island. This threat includes both actual
physical harm resulting from natural predatory, defensive, or feeding
behaviors, as well as disease transmission to human, domestic livestock, and
indigenous wildlife populations of Rhode Island. Many wild animals require
highly specialized nutritional, environmental, and veterinary care. It is
therefore necessary to ensure that only disease-free, wild animals are
imported into and possessed within Rhode Island, by those persons who can
demonstrate they have adequate knowledge of species specific animal health and
husbandry.

1.03 PURPOSE - The purpose of these rules and regulations is to:

(a) Permit importation and possession within Rhode Island of those wild
animals which are free of diseases which pose a threat to humans, livestock
and native wildlife.

(b) Allow importation/possession by only those persons who can demonstrate
they have both adequate facilities, and adequate knowledge of animal health
and husbandry to ensure both public safety as well as the health and well
being of the imported/possessed wild animal.

(c) Ensure endangered and threatened species are not imported/possessed in
Rhode Island without a permit.

SECTION 2.00 DEFINITIONS

Wherever used in these rules and regulations the following terms shall be
construed as follows:

"Domestic Animals" shall mean animals, which through extremely long
association with humans, have been bred to a degree which has resulted in
genetic changes affecting the temperament, color, conformation, or other
attributes of the species to an extent that makes them unique and
distinguishable from wild individuals of their species.

Such animals may include but are not limited to:

> Domestic dog (Canis familiaris) excluding hybrids with wild canids  
Domestic cat (Felis catus) excluding hybrids with wild felines  
Domestic horse (Eguus caballus) including hybrids with Eguus asinus  
Domestic ass, burro, and donkey (Eguus asinus)  
Domestic cattle (Bos taurus and Bos indicus)  
Domestic sheep (Ovis aries)  
Domestic goat (Capra hircus)  
Domestic swine (Sus scrofa domestica)  
Llama (Lama alama)  
Alpaca (Lama pacos)  
Camels (Camelus bactrianus and Camelus dromedarius)  
Domesticated races of European rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus)  
Domesticated races of chickens (Gallus gallus)  
Domesticated races of ducks and geese (Anatidae) morphologically
distinguishable from wild birds  
Domesticated races of guinea fowl (Numida meleagris)  
Domesticated races of peafowl (Pavo cristatus)

"Endangered Species" those species of animals designated as threatened or
endangered according to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and published in
the Federal Register.

"Department" shall mean the Department of Environmental Management.

"Director" shall mean the Director of the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management, or his/her duly authorized agent or agents.

"Enclosure" shall mean any structure used to immediately restrict an animal or
animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, run, cage or
compartment.

"Native Wildlife" shall mean animals occurring naturally, either presently or
historically, within the boundaries of the State of Rhode Island.

"Person" shall mean any person, firm, association, organization, partnership,
business trust, corporation or company including but not limited to
educational and research institutions, zoological gardens, schools, colleges,
universities, pet stores, animal care facilities, and laboratories who import,
hold, sell, purchase or possess any wild animal in accordance with sections
4-18-1 and 4-18-2 of the General Laws of Rhode Island.

"Quarantine" shall refer to the types of quarantine as defined by the American
Public Health Association, namely: (1) complete quarantine; (2) modified
quarantine; (3) personal surveillance; and (4) segregation.

"Veterinarian" shall mean an individual currently licensed to practice
veterinary medicine in the state of Rhode Island.

"Wild Animals" shall mean vertebrate animals and insecta other than those
defined as domestic animals or native wildlife.

SECTION 3.00 REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPORTATION OR POSSESSION OF WILD ANIMALS

3.01 A PERMIT to import into, receive or possess in this state animals listed
in section 8.00 herein, shall be restricted to United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) and American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums
(AAZPA) approved, zoos and research institutes or other USDA approved
facilities as well as exhibitors and private persons seeking to import or
possess a wild animal pursuant to the provisions of section 4-18-3 of the
General Laws of Rhode Island, 1956, as amended, and the rules and regulations
herein. Obtaining such permit does not preclude conformance with such other
Federal, State or local requirements for licensure certification or permit
which may be required.

3.02 No other person shall be allowed to import into, receive or possess any
animals listed in section 8.00 herein, other than United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) approved and American Association of Zoological Parks and
Aquariums (AAZPA) approved zoos and research institutes, or as well as
exhibitors and private persons seeking to import or possess a wild animal.

3.03 The Director in his/her discretion may issue a permit to import, receive
or possess wild animals in accordance with section 3.01 to section 8.00
herein. The application shall include but not be limited to the following. For
each species requested:

> (a) The number, sex, age, true scientific name and exact identification of
the individual animals.

>

> (b) The carrier and probable point of first arrival as well as the location
where each animal will be kept in Rhode Island.

>

> (c) The purpose for which they are to be imported/possessed.

>

> (d) The full name and complete address of the consignee.

>

> (e) The full name and complete address of the consignor.

>

> (f) The location where the animal(s) shall be held in quarantine pending the
completion of such tests, veterinary examinations, and observation period as
may be specified by the department in issuance of the import permit, as well
as the location where the animal(s) shall be permanently held. Adequate
quarantine and/or permanent enclosure facilities must be available for
inspection and approved by the Department prior to issuance of the import
permit.

>

> (g) The name and address of the veterinarian currently licensed in Rhode
Island who shall conduct the tests and examinations specified by the
Department.

>

> (h) A letter from a veterinarian currently licensed to practice within the
state of Rhode Island stating that (s)he shall conduct the tests and periodic
medical examinations specified by the department.

>

> (i) Except for AAZPA certified facilities, a person desiring to import or
possess a wild animal shall also provide a detailed written description to the
Department of the manner in which the animal's nutritional, housing, and
exercise needs will be met, as well as any needs specific to the particular
species subject to the Department's approval.

>

> (j) Permit fee as specified by Rhode Island General Laws Section 4-18-8.

SECTION 4.00 ISSUANCE OF IMPORT/POSSESSION PERMITS

4.01 Issuance of import/possession permits may be made by the Department upon:

> (a) Receipt of written application providing the information enumerated
under Section 3.03 not less than seven (7) days preceding the probable date of
shipment.

>

> (b) Completion of an inspection by the department to ensure the quarantine
and/or final enclosure facility designated in the application is adequate.

>

> (c) Payment of the necessary permit fees as required under 4-18-8.

>

> (d) Determination by the Department that human as well as native wildlife
and domestic animal health and safety are not endangered.

>

> (e) Approval of the probable point of first arrival into this state.

>

> (f) Receipt by the State Veterinarian of a Certificate of Veterinary
Inspection signed and issued within 30 days of anticipated importation by a
veterinarian licensed in the State of Origin and countersigned by the official
in the State of Origin responsible for the control of animal disease,
specifically identifying the individual animals imported. The certificate
shall state that such animals are free from signs of infectious, contagious
and communicable disease, and certify such animals are free of specific
diseases enumerated by the Department and available upon request.

4.02 The Permit shall indicate the conditions under which the animal(s) are to
be maintained, such conditions are to be determined by current prevailing
(AAZPA) standards and in accordance with Section 3.03 (a-j) of these
regulations.

SECTION 5.00 CONDITIONS OF IMPORTATION/POSSESSION PERMIT

5.01 Should the ownership, location, enclosure or purpose of
importation/possession change, new application for a permit shall be made in
pursuant to Section 3.03 of these regulations.

5.02 Animals imported/possessed under permit shall not be used for breeding
purposes without prior notification of and approval by [as per Section 3.03
(c)] the Department. Such approval shall be indicated on the permit issued.

(a) The owner of the offspring of any permitted animals shall apply for a
permit for such offspring within two (2) weeks of their birth.

5.03 The possessor of any import/possession permit shall notify the Department
within twenty four (24) hours of the death and immediately upon escape of any
permitted animal.

5.04 The Department reserves the right to immediate examination and testing of
imported/possessed wild animals when there is probable cause as determined by
the Department to suspect that the animals are harboring diseases or parasites
suspected of endangering public health or the health of domestic animals or
that of native wild animals. Measures deemed necessary to protect domestic
animals, public health and native wild animals, may include, but are not
limited to: quarantine, seizure, destruction, and postmortem examination.

SECTION 6.00 QUARANTINE

6.01 All imported animals requiring a permit must be maintained under
quarantine in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-18-11 of the General
Laws of Rhode Island.

6.02 The conditions of quarantine to be imposed shall be determined by the
Director or his/her duly authorized representative on the basis of the
conditions and circumstances of each individual case.

SECTION 7.00 VIOLATIONS

Any violation pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4-18 of the General Laws
of Rhode Island and the rules and regulations herein may be cause for imposing
penalties in accordance with the provisions of the above mentioned statute, as
well as revocation of existing import/possession permit(s).

7.01 Any wild animal imported/possessed into or within the State of Rhode
Island violating the provisions of Chapter 4-18 or regulations promulgated
thereunder shall be considered contraband. Any such animal which poses a
threat to public safety may be confiscated by DEM or any other law enforcement
agency. If any animal that is confiscated cannot be safely confined, or if
said animal is severely ill, debilitated, or injured, the animal may be
euthanized, and it's carcass held as evidence. DEM shall hold such animal or
carcass thereof until criminal or administrative proceedings have been
completed. The person importing/possessing any such confiscated animal shall
pay the costs of board, feed, veterinary care, and transport for any such
confiscated animal until such time as the criminal or administrative
proceedings have been completed.

7.02 If said animal is adjudged to be possessed/imported in violation of any
provisions of Chapter 4-18, the Department shall make reasonable attempt to
find suitable placement of such animal which meets requirements of Chapter
4-18 and any regulation adopted thereunder. If suitable placement is not
found, the animal may then be euthanized.

7.03 Persons in Rhode Island possessing any animal listed in Section 8.0 at
the date of filing of these regulations with the Secretary of State shall have
six (6) months to obtain an Importation/Possession Permit, after which time
said person shall be in violation of these regulations.

SECTION 8.00 ANIMALS REQUIRING IMPORTATION/POSSESSION PERMIT

8.01 All species listed as threatened or endangered by the United States
Department of the Interior.

8.02 Class Mammalia (Mammals)

  * Order Chiroptera: bats - All non native species
  * Order Primates: All primates
  * Order Rodentia
    * Family Capromyidae: nutrias
  * Order Carnivora:
    * Family Canidae (including non-domestic hybrids thereof)
    * Family Ursidae
    * Family Viverridae - civets, mongooses
    * Family Hyaenidae - aardwolf, hyenas
    * Family Felidae - cats (including non-domestic Hybrids thereof)
  * Order Proboscidea - elephants
  * Order Perissodactyla - odd toed ungulates
    * Family Equidea - wild horses, zebra, asses
    * Family Tapiridae - tapirs
    * Family Rhinocerotidae - rhinos
  * Order Artiodactyla - even toed ungulates
    * Family Suidae
    * Family Tayassuidae - peccaries
    * Family Hippopotamidae - hippos
    * Family Tagulidae - chevrotrains (mouse deer)
    * Family Cervidae - deer, elk
    * Family Giraffidae - okapi, giraffe
    * Family Antilocapridae - pronghorn
    * Family Bovidae
      * Subfamily bovinae
        * Genus Tragelaphus (bongo, sitatunga, kudus, bushbuck, nyalas)
        * Genus Taurotragus (elands)
        * Genus Boselaphus (nilgai, bluebuck)
        * Genus Tetracerus (4 horned antelope, chousingha)
        * Genus Bubalus (asian water buffalos, anoa)
        * Genus Syncerus (african buffalo)
        * Genus Bos (banteng, gaur, seladang, kouprey, yak)
        * Genus Bison (American & European)
      * Subfamily Cephalophinae - duikers
        * Genus Cephalophus (duikers)
        * Genus Syevicapra (gray or common duikers)
      * Subfamily Hippotraginae
        * Genus Kobus (waterbuck, lechwes, kob & onotragus, adenota, puku)
        * Genus Redunda (reedbuck)
        * Genus Pelea (phebok)
        * Genus Hippotragus (roan & sable antelopes)
        * Genus Oryx (oryx, gemsbok)
        * Genus Addaxes
        * Genus Damaliscus (sassabies)
        * Genus Alcelaphus (hartebeasts)
        * Genus Gorgon Connochaetes (wildebeasts, gnus)
  * Order Artiodactyla
    * Family Bovidae
      * Subfamily Antilopinae
        * Genus Oreotragus (klipspringer)
        * Genus Ourebia (oribi)
        * Genus Raphicerus (steenbok, grysbok)
        * Genus Neotragus (dwarf antelopes)
        * Genus Madoqua (dikdiks)
        * Genus Dorcatragus (beira)
        * Genus Antilope (black buck)
        * Genus Aepyceros (impala)
        * Genus Ammodorcas (dibatang)
        * Genus Litocranius (gerenuk)
        * Genus Gazella (gazelles)
        * Genus Antidorcas (springbuck)
        * Genus Procapra (central asian gazelles)
      * Subfamily Caprinae
        * Genus Panthalops (chiru, tibetan antelope)
        * Genus Saiga
        * Genus Namorhedus (gorak)
        * Genus Capricornis (serows)
        * Genus Oreamnos (mountain goat)
        * Genus Rupicapra (chamois)
        * Genus Budorcas (takin)
        * Genus Ovibos (musk ox)
        * Genus Hemitragus (tahrs)
        * Genus Capra (goats - 8 species)
        * Genus Pseudois (bharals, blue sheep)
        * Genus Ammotragus (aoudad, barbary sheep)
        * Genus Ovis 2 subgenera, 8 species Trichosurus Vilpecula (brush tailed possum)

8.03 Class Aves (Birds)

  * Java Sparrow - (padda oryzivora)
  * Sturhidae - Pink or Rose colored Starling (sturnus roseus)
  * Order Sphenisciformes - penguins
  * Order Casuariiformes
    * Family Casuaridae - cassowaries
  * Order Podicipitiformes - grebes - non native species
  * Order Procellariiformes
    * Family Procellariidae
    * Family Hydrobatidae - storm petrels
  * Order Pelecaniformes
    * Family Fregatidae - frigatebirds
  * Order Ciconiiformes
    * Family Balaenicipitidae - shoebill
  * Order Falconiformes - All non native members of the following families:
    * Family Cathartidae - New World Vultures
    * Family Accipitridae - hawks, eagles & old world vultures
    * Family Falconidae - falcons
    * Family Pandionidae - osprey
    * Family Sagittariidae - secretary birds
  * Order Galliformes - All members of:
    * Family Megapodiidae except brush turkey
    * Family Opisthocomidae - hoatzin
  * Order Apodiformes
    * Family Trochilidae - hummingbirds
  * Order Trogoniformes - trogons
  * Order Psittaciformes - Quaker Parakeet - (Myiopsitta monachus)

8.04 CLASS REPTILIA (REPTILES)

  * Order Squamata
    * Family Helodermatidae - beaded lizards, gila monsters
    * Family Chamaeleontidae - old world chamaelonidae
    * Family Leptotyphlopidae
    * Family Boidae
      * Subfamily Pythoninae
      * Python reticulatus - reticulated python
    * Family Colubridae
      * Subfamily Colubrinae - Thelotornis kirtlandi - african twig snake
    * Dispholidus typus - boomslang
      * Subfamily Boiginie - boigine vipers
      * Subfamily Lycodontinae - mole vipers
    * Family Elapidae - cobras, coral snakes, mambas ets.
    * Family Hycrophiiade - sea snakes
    * Family Viperidae - vipers
    * Family Crotalidae - pit vipers

8.05 CLASS OSTEICHTHYES (FISHES)

  * Gambusia Affinis (Mosquito Fish)
  * Etenopharyngodon Tdella (Grass Carp)
  * Umbra Pygmaea (Eastern Mudminnow)
  * Order Cypriniformes
    * Family Electrophoridae - electric eels

SECTION 9.00 APPLICABILITY

These Regulations shall apply to any person wishing to import or possess a
wild animal into or within the State of Rhode Island.

SECTION 10.00 SEVERABILITY

If any section or provision of these regulations is held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining sections or provisions of the
regulations shall not be affected thereby. These regulations supercede any
prior regulations.

SECTION 11.00 CONSISTENCY

No provision of these regulations shall be construed to prevent enforcement of
any other state, federal, or local laws and regulations duly adopted for the
purpose of protecting the public health and welfare.

SECTION 12.00 APPEAL AND HEARING PROCEDURE

12.01 Opportunity for Hearing

(a) Denials: Any person whose application for a permit, permit renewal, other
approval, or a variance has been denied by the permitting agency, acting
through the Division may appeal to the Administrative Adjudication Division
for review of the decision on which the denial is based.

(b) Violations: Any person who has been issued a notice of violation of any of
the provisions of these rules, may request a hearing from the Administrative
Adjudication Division, subject to the provisions of R.I.G.L. 42-17.1-2(u).

(c) Time of Filing: All requests for a hearing shall be made in writing within
ten (10) days of receipt of the notice of denial or violation or other action
and shall be addressed to the Administrative Adjudication Division.

(d) Hearings and Administrative Procedure: Pursuant to the authority granted
to the Department in Chapter 42-17.1 (1977 Reenactment) and Chapter 42-35
(1977 Reenactment), the hearings and administrative procedures shall conform
to the "Administrative Rules of Practice and Procedure for the Department of
Environmental Management, Administrative Adjudication Division for
Environmental Matters."

SECTION 13.00 EFFECTIVE DATES

These rules shall take effect on the date specified in the attached
certification of promulgation by the Director of Environmental Management and
the Environmental Standards Board.

SUPERCEDED RULES

Rules and Regulations Pertaining to Importation of Wild Animals (RY-18-1WA)