# South Carolina State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• S.C. CODE REGS. §50-11-1765 \- Possession, sale, or importation of live
wolves or coyotes unlawful; exceptions.

It is unlawful to sell live wolves or coyotes within the State or to ship or
import live wolves or coyotes into this State, except for exhibition or
scientific purposes upon the approval of the department as provided by
regulations promulgated by the department. A person may not have a live wolf
or coyote in his possession without a permit issued by the department.

* * *

• S.C. CODE REGS. §50-16-20 - Importation of wildlife for certain purposes
prohibited; investigation; permit.

(A) It is unlawful for a person to import, possess, or transport for the
purpose of release or to introduce or bring into this State any live wildlife
of the following types without a permit from the department:

> (1) a furbearer, a member of the family Cervidae, a nondomestic member of
the families Suidae (pigs), Tayassuidae (peccaries), Bovidae (bison, mountain
goat, mountain sheep), coyote, bear, or turkey (genus Meleagris). Furbearer
includes, but is not limited to, red and gray fox, raccoon, opossum, muskrat,
mink, skunk, otter, bobcat, weasel, and beaver;

>

> (2) a species of marine or estuarine fish, crustacean, mollusk, or other
marine invertebrate not already found in the wild, or not native to this
State.

>

> (3) a species of freshwater fish, crustacean, mollusk, or other freshwater
invertebrate not already found in the wild or not native to this State.

(B) A permit may be granted only after the investigations and inspections of
the wildlife have been made as the department considers necessary and the
department approves the possession, transportation, or importation into the
State. The department may not issue a permit unless it finds:

> (1) the wildlife was taken lawfully in the jurisdiction in which it
originated;

>

> (2) the importation, release, or possession of the wildlife is not
reasonably expected to adversely impact the natural resources of the State or
its wildlife populations.