# South Dakota State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• S.D. ADMIN. R. 12:68:18:03 - Permit required.

A permit from the board is required to import nondomestic animals. In
addition, a permit as described in § 12:68:18:03.03 is required to possess in
South Dakota any nondomestic mammal, or any of its hybrids, listed in this
section:

> (1) Of the order Carnivora, all nondomestic members of the following
families:

>

>> (a) Felidae;

>>

>> (b) Canidae;

>>

>> (c) Ursidae;

>>

>> (d) Mustelidae; and

>>

>> (e) Hyaenidae;

>

> (2) Of the order Artiodactyla, all nondomestic members; and

>

> (3) Of the order Perissodactyla, all nondomestic members of the following
families:

>

>> (a) Tapiridae; and

>>

>> (b) Rhinocerotidae.

* * *

• S.D. ADMIN. R. 12:68:18:03.01 - Specifically prohibited nondomestic mammals.

The board may issue only a temporary permit or a zoo permit for possession of
the following nondomestic mammals or any of their hybrids. Possession of these
mammals is otherwise specifically prohibited:

> (1) Of the family Suidae, all nondomestic members; and

>

> (2) Of the family Canidae, genus Nyctereutes, species procyonoides (raccoon
dog). A person possessing before December 31, 1993, a nondomestic mammal
listed in this section may not translocate, purchase additions, or market the
mammal within South Dakota. A person possessing such a mammal must quarantine
the mammal and must obtain a grandfather permit until the mammal is disposed
of.

* * *

• S.D. CODIFIED LAWS ANN. 40-14-2

All animals brought into this state for any purpose except immediate slaughter
shall be accompanied by a certificate of health, issued in duplicate by
authority of the state or territory from which it originates, or by authority
of the United States department of agriculture, setting forth that such
animals are free from all contagious, infectious, epidemic or communicable
disease, and from infestation of destructive parasites and does not originate
from a district of quarantine, infestation or infection, and that it has been
inspected within a period of not more than thirty days prior to the arrival of
such stock. One of the duplicate certificates shall be mailed to the animal
industry board at Pierre, in time for it to be received before the animal
arrives at its destination, and the other shall be attached to the bill of
lading when the animal is brought into the state. Any person who brings
animals into the state in violation of this section is guilty of a Class 6
felony.