# Tennessee State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• TENN. CODE ANN §70-4-401 - Prohibited acts.

(a) It is unlawful for any person to possess, transport, import, export, buy,
sell, barter, propagate or transfer any wildlife, whether indigenous to this
state or not, except as provided by this part and rules and regulations
promulgated by the Tennessee wildlife resources commission pursuant to this
part.

(b) No person shall possess Class I or Class II wildlife without having
documentary evidence showing the name and address of the supplier of such
wildlife and date of acquisition.

* * *

• TENN. CODE ANN §70-4-403 - Classifications of wildlife.

Live wildlife, kept and maintained for any purpose, shall be classified in the
following five (5) classes:

(1) Class I - This class includes all species inherently dangerous to humans.
These species may only be possessed by zoos, circuses and commercial
propagators, except as otherwise provided in this part. The commission, in
conjunction with the commissioner of agriculture, may add or delete species
from the list of Class I wildlife by promulgating rules and regulations. The
following is a listing of animals considered inherently dangerous:

> (A) Mammals:

>

>> (i) Primates - Gorillas, orangutans, chimpanzees, gibbons, siamangs,
mandrills, drills, baboons, Gelada baboons;

>>

>> (ii) Carnivores:

>>

>>> (a) Wolves - All species;

>>>

>>> (b) Bears - All species; and

>>>

>>> (c) Lions, tigers, leopards, jaguars, cheetahs, cougars - All species;

>>

>> (iii) Order Proboscidia: Elephants - All species;

>>

>> (iv) Order Perissodactyla: Rhinoceroses - All species; and

>>

>> (v) Order Artiodactyla: Hippopotamus, African buffalo;

>

> (B) Reptiles:

>

>> (i) Order Crocodylia: Crocodiles and alligators - All species; and

>

>> (ii) Order Serpentes: Snakes - All poisonous species; and

>

> (C) Amphibians: All poisonous species;

(2) Class II - This class includes native species, except those listed in
other classes;

(3) Class III - This class requires no permits except those required by the
department of agriculture, and includes all species not listed in other
classes and includes, but is not limited to, those listed in subdivisions
(3)(A)-(Q). The commission, in conjunction with the commissioner of
agriculture, may add or delete species from the list of Class III wildlife by
promulgating rules and regulations:

> (A) Nonpoisonous reptiles and amphibians;

>

> (B) Rodents - Gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, rats, mice, squirrels and
chipmunks;

>

> (C) Rabbits, hares, moles and shrews;

>

> (D) Ferrets and chinchillas;

>

> (E) Llamas, alpacas, guanacos, vicunas, camels, giraffes and bison;

>

> (F) Avian species not otherwise listed, excluding North American game birds,
ostriches and cassowary;

>

> (G) Semi-domestic hogs, sheep and goats;

>

> (H) All fish held in aquaria;

>

> (I) Bovidae not otherwise listed;

>

> (J) Marsupials;

>

> (K) Common domestic farm animals;

>

> (L) Equidae;

>

> (M) Primates not otherwise listed;

>

> (N) Bobcat/domestic cat hybrids;

>

> (O) Hybrids resulting from a cross between a Class II species and a domestic
animal or Class III species;

>

> (P) Cervidae except white-tailed deer; and

>

> (Q) Furbearing mammals, including those native to Tennessee, raised solely
for the sale of fur;

(4) Class IV - This class includes those native species that may be possessed
only by zoos and temporary exhibitors; provided, that rehabilitation
facilities may possess Class IV wildlife as provided by rules established by
the commission if authorized by a letter from the director of the agency:

> (A) Black bear (Ursus americanus);

>

> (B) White-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus);

>

> (C) Wild turkey (Meleagris gallapavo) (including the eggs thereof);

>

> (D) [Deleted by 1996 amendment.]

>

> (E) Hybrids of a Class IV species other than bobcat shall be Class IV; and

>

> (F) Animals that are morphologically indistinguishable from native Class IV
wildlife shall be Class IV; and

(5) Class V - This class includes such species that the commission, in
conjunction with the commissioner of agriculture, may designate by rules and
regulations as injurious to the environment. Species so designated may only be
held in zoos under such conditions as to prevent the release or escape of such
wildlife into the environment.

* * *

• TENN. CODE ANN §70-4-404 - Permits - Fees.

(a) The agency shall issue permits for possessing live wildlife as defined in
this part.

(b)(1) The commission shall adopt reasonable rules for issuing permits to
possess live wildlife and establishing the conditions thereof. The conditions
shall be directed toward assuring the health, welfare, and safety of animals,
the public and, where necessary, the security of facilities in which the
animals are kept.

(2) The executive director of the agency may authorize by letter permission to
possess any class of wildlife for approved research studies or for the
temporary holding of animals in the interest of public safety. The executive
director may exempt specific events from the caging and handling requirements
established for Class I wildlife. Approval of an exemption will be based on a
written request that outlines safety precautions that must be implemented
during the specified activity.

(c) Class I wildlife.

(1) Persons legally possessing Class I wildlife prior to June 25, 1991, shall
obtain annually a personal possession permit to keep such Class I wildlife. To
obtain a personal possession permit, such persons shall comply with all of the
provisions of this part. After June 25, 1991, no new animals shall be brought
into possession under authority of a personal possession permit. Persons in
legal possession of one (1) or more species of Class I wildlife as of June 25,
1991, may maintain the lineage of such species up to a maximum of three (3)
animals per species. Persons in legal possession of the offspring of such
Class I wildlife shall have a maximum of twelve (12) months from the date of
birth of such offspring to obtain appropriate permits for such offspring, or
to dispose of such offspring through an appropriate commercial propagator, or
by any other manner permitted by law within the state. The provisions of this
section apply solely to persons in legal possession of Class I wildlife as of
June 25, 1991, and shall not be construed to authorize new personal possession
of Class I wildlife.

(2) The executive director shall issue a permit upon a satisfactory showing of
qualifications to possess live wildlife under the following conditions:

> (A) The applicant must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age;

>

> (B) The applicant must have at least two (2) years of experience in the
handling or care of the Class I species for which the applicant is applying,
or, in the alternative, must take a written examination, developed and
administered by the agency, evidencing basic knowledge of the habits and
requirements, in regard to proper diet, health care, exercise needs and
housing of the species to be covered by the permit. Experience gained while in
violation of this part shall not be considered qualifying experience;

>

> (C) The facilities for holding Class I wildlife must be located on the
premises on which the permit holder resides or shall have a full-time resident
caretaker to supervise the care and security of the facilities. Facilities for
Class I animals may not be on premises of less than one (1) acre for a
personal possession permit and three (3) acres for a commercial propagator
facility permit, and may not be located in a multi-unit dwelling or trailer
park; and

>

> (D) The applicant must have a plan for the quick and safe recapture of the
wildlife, or if recapture is impossible, for the destruction of any animal
held under the permit. The applicant must have the legal authority to possess
weapons or other equipment necessary to carry out the plan and, in fact,
possess such weapons or other equipment.

(3) The permittee shall control and maintain Class I wildlife at all times in
such a manner as to prevent direct exposure or contact between the animal(s)
and the public; provided, that a trained elephant may be brought into contact
with the public under the close supervision of a qualified trainer or handler.

(d) No person shall hold live wildlife in captivity without first obtaining
the appropriate permit as provided in this part. The annual permits and fees
for holding live wildlife are as follows:

(1)(A) PERSONAL POSSESSION. Class I: $150/animal or $1,000/facility; and (B)
Class II: $10.00/animal or $100/facility;

(2) TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. A permit for transferring any Class I or II animal
held under a personal possession permit. If the transfer of the animal is
ordered by the agency, no transfer permit is required;

(3) COMMERCIAL PROPAGATOR. $1,000/facility for Class I wildlife;

(4) PROPAGATOR $25.00/facility for small game birds and waterfowl; and
$100/facility for all Class II wildlife except small game birds and waterfowl;

(5) IMPORTATION. $10.00/shipment or $100 per year;

(6) TEMPORARY EXHIBITOR. $100/30 day period;

(7) PERMANENT EXHIBITOR. $500/year/facility;

(8) COMMERCIAL WILDLIFE PRESERVE. $150/year for big game; and $75.00/year for
small game;

(9) FALCONRY. $40.00/year or other time period as might coincide with federal
permit requirements;

(10) QUALIFICATION EXAMINATION. $10.00/examination; and

(11) ZOOS, NATURE CENTERS, REHABILITATION CENTERS, AND EDUCATIONAL EXHIBITS
CERTIFIED AS NONPROFIT. No charge.