# Utah State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• UTAH ADMIN. R. 657-3-17 - Personal Use.

A person may collect and subsequently possess live or dead zoological animals
or their parts for a personal use only as follows:

(1) Certificates of registration are not issued for the collection and
subsequent possession of any species or subspecies of zoological animals or
their parts classified as prohibited.

(2) A certificate of registration is required for collecting and subsequently
possessing any species or subspecies of zoological animals or their parts
classified as controlled, except as otherwise provided by the Wildlife Board.

(3) A certificate of registration is not required for collecting and
subsequently possessing species or subspecies of zoological animals or their
parts classified as noncontrolled, except as provided in Subsections
R657-3-20(3)(b), R657-3-25(3)(b), and R657-3-31(3)(b).

* * *

• UTAH ADMIN. R. 657-3-24 - Classification of Mammals.

(1) Mammals are classified as follows for collection:

TABLE 4

Common Name

Family

Genus/Species

Classification

Abert's Squirrel

Sciuridae

Sciurus aberti

Prohibited

Bats

All families

All species

Prohibited

Bears

Ursidae

Black bear

Ursus americanus

Prohibited

Grizzly bear

Ursus arctos

Prohibited

Big game mammals

Bighorn sheep

Bovidae

All species

Prohibited

Bison (wild, free-ranging)

Bovidae

Bison bison

Prohibited

Elk (wild)

Cervidae

Cervus elaphus canadensis

Prohibited

Mule deer

Cervidae

Odocoileus hemionus

Prohibited

Moose

Cervidae

Alces alces

Prohibited

Pronghorn antelope

Antilocapridae

Antilocapra americana

Prohibited

Rocky Mountain Goat

Bovidae

Oreamnos americanus

Prohibited

Canids

Canidae

All species

Prohibited

Cats

Felidae

All species except felis catus which is domestic

Prohibited

Chipmunks

Sciuridae

Tamias/all species

Noncontrolled

Ground squirrel

Sciuridae

Golden-mantled

Spermophilus lateralis

Noncontrolled

Townsend

Spermophilus townsendii

Noncontrolled

Uinta

Spermophilus armatus

Noncontrolled

Whitetail antelope

Spermophilus leucurus

Noncontrolled

Hares and Rabbits

Leporidae

Cottontail

Sylvilagus/ all species

Prohibited

Snowshoe

Lepus americanus

Prohibited

Kangaroo mice

Heteromyidae

Microdipodos Megacephalus

Noncontrolled

Kangaroo rats

Heteromyidae

Merriam kangaroo rat

Dipodomys merriami

Prohibited

Desert kangaroo rat

Dipodomys deserti

Prohibited

Mustelids

Mustelidae

All species (badger, black-footed ferret, marten, mink, river otter, skunk,
weasel, and wolverine)

Prohibited

Northern pocket gopher

Geomyidae

Thomomys bottae

Noncontrolled

Rats

Muridae

All species

Noncontrolled

Ringtail

Bassari-Scidae

Bassariscus astutus

Prohibited

Utah prairie dog

Sciuridae

Cynomys parvidens

Prohibited

(2) All species and subspecies of mammals not listed in Table 4 are classified
as controlled.

* * *

• UTAH ADMIN. R. 657-3-25 - Classification of Reptiles

(1) Reptiles are classified as follows for collection:

TABLE 5

Common Name

Family

Genus/Species

Classification

Lizards

Banded gila monster

Helodermatidae

Heloderma suspectum cinctum

Prohibited

Desert night lizard

Xantusiidae

Xantusia vigilis vigilis

Controlled

Desert iguana

Iguanidae

Dipsosaurus dorsalis dorsalis

Prohibited

Mojave zebra tailed lizard

Phrynosomatidae

Callisaurus draconoides rhodostictus

Controlled

Glen Canyon chuckwalla

Iguanidae

Sauromalus obesus multiforaminatus

Prohibited

Utah banded gecko

Gekkonidae

Coleonyx variegatus utahensis

Controlled

Utah night lizard

Xantusiidae

Xantusia vigilis utahensis

Controlled

Western chuckwalla

Iguanidae

Sauromalus obesus obesus

Prohibited

Snakes

California kingsnake (black-and- white banded form)

Colubridae

Lampropeltis getula californiae

Controlled

Desert glossy snake

Colubridae

Arizona elegans eburnata

Prohibited

Great Plains rat snake

Colubridae

Elaphe guttata emoryi

Controlled

Mojave Desert sidewinder

Viperidae

Crotalus cerastes cerastes

Prohibited

Mojave patch-nosed snake

Colubridae

Salvadora hexalepis mojavensis

Controlled

Mojave rattlesnake

Viperidae

Crotalus scutulatus

Prohibited

Sonoran lyre snake

Colubridae

Trimorphodon biscutatus lambda

Prohibited

Speckled rattlesnake

Viperidae

Crotalus mitchellii

Prohibited

Utah (western) blind snake

Leptotyphlopidae

Leptotyphlops humilis utahensis

Controlled

Utah milk snake

Colubridae

Lampropeltis triangulum taylori

Prohibited

Utah mountain kingsnake

Colubridae

Lampropeltis pyromelana infralabialis

Prohibited

Western rattlesnake

Viperidae

Crotalus viridis including all subspecies

Controlled

Turtles

Desert tortoise

Testudinidae

Gopherus agassizii

Prohibited

(2) All species and subspecies of reptiles not listed in Table 5 are
classified as noncontrolled.

(3)(a) Up to three reptiles of each species classified as noncontrolled may be
collected and subsequently possessed without obtaining a certificate of
registration. (b) A person must obtain a certificate of registration to
collect and subsequently possess four or more reptiles of each species
classified as noncontrolled within a calendar year, except as provided in
Subsection (4).

(4) A person may collect and subsequently possess any number of the following
species of zoological animals without obtaining a certificate of registration:
(a) Side-blotched lizard (Uta stansburiana); and (b) Western terrestrial
garter snake (Thamnophis elegans).

(5) A person may not transport a live snapping turtle or Texas spiny softshell
turtle from the water from which it was captured without first obtaining a
certificate of registration.

* * *

• UTAH ADMIN. R. 657-3-27 - Personal, Scientific, or Educational Use.

A person may import and subsequently possess live species or subspecies of
zoological animals for a personal, scientific, or educational use only as
follows:

(1)(a) Certificates of registration are not issued for importing and
subsequently possessing any live species or subspecies of zoological animals
classified as prohibited, except as provided in Subsection (b).

(b) The division may issue a certificate of registration to a zoo, aviary,
government agency, a person involved in wildlife research, university, or
college to import and subsequently possess live species or subspecies of
zoological animals classified as prohibited if, in the opinion of the
division, the scientific or educational activity is beneficial to wildlife or
significantly benefits the general public without material detriment to
wildlife.

(2) A certificate of registration, an entry permit number, and a certificate
of veterinary inspection are required for importing and subsequently
possessing any live species or subspecies of zoological animals classified as
controlled.

(3) A certificate of registration is not required for importing and
subsequently possessing any live species or subspecies of zoological animals
classified as noncontrolled.