# Virginia State Laws Governing Private Possession of Exotic Animals

![View Map](../../images/us-map-icon.gif)  
[View Map](b4a2_exotic_animals.php)

• 4 VAC 15-30-10 - Possession, importation, sale, etc., of wild animals.

Under the authority of §§ 29.1-103 and 29.1-521 of the Code of Virginia it
shall be unlawful to take, possess, import, cause to be imported, export,
cause to be exported, buy, sell, offer for sale, or liberate within the
Commonwealth any wild animal unless otherwise specifically permitted by law or
regulation. Unless otherwise stated, for the purposes of identifying species
regulated by the board, when both the scientific and common names are listed,
the scientific reference to genus and species will take precedence over common
names.

* * *

• 4 VAC 15-30-40 - Importation requirements, possession and sale of nonnative
(exotic) animals. A. Permit required. A special permit is required and may be
issued by the department, if consistent with the department's fish and
wildlife management program, to import, possess, or sell those nonnative
(exotic) animals listed below that the board finds and declares to be
predatory or undesirable within the meaning and intent of § 29.1-542 of the
Code of Virginia, in that their introduction into the Commonwealth will be
detrimental to the native fish and wildlife resources of Virginia:

**AMPHIBIANS:**

Order

Family

Genus/Species

Common Name

Anura

Buforidae

Bufo marinus

Giant or marine toad*

Pipidae

Xenopus spp.

Tongueless or African clawed frog

Caudata

mbystomatidae

Ambystoma tigrium Mavortium

Barred tiger salamander

A. t. Diaboli

Gray tiger

A. t. Melanostictum

Blotched tiger Salamander

**BIRDS:**

Order

Family

Genus/Species

Common Name

Psittaciformes

Psittacidae

Myiopsitta monachus

Monk parakeet*

**FISH:**

Order

Family

Genus/Species

Common Name

Cypriniformes

Catostomidae

Ictiobus bubalus

Smallmouth buffalo*

I. cyprinellus

Bigmouth buffalo*

I. niger

Black buffalo*

Characidae

Pygopristis spp.

Piranhas

Pygocentrus spp.

Rooseveltiella spp.

Serrasalmo spp.

Taddyella spp.

Cyprinidae

Aristichyhys Nobilis

Bighead carp*

Ctenopharyngodon idella

Grass carp or white amur

Cyprinella lutrensis

Red shiner

Hypophthalmichthys molitrix

Silver carp*

Mylopharynogodom piceus

Black carp

Scardinius erythrophthalmus

Rudd

Tinca tinca

Tench*

Gobiesociformes

Gobiidae

Proterorhinus marmoratus

Tubenose goby

Neogobius melanostomus

Round goby

Perciformes

Cichlidae

Tilapia spp.

Tilapia

Gymnocephalus cernuum

Ruffe*

Siluriformes

Clariidae

All Species

Air-breathing catfish

**MAMMALS:**

Order

Family

Genus/Species

Common Name

Artiodactyla

Suidae

All Species

Pigs or Hogs*

Cervidae

All Species

Deer*

Carnivora

Canidae

All Species

Wild Dogs,* Wolves, Coyotes or Coyote hybrids, Jackals and Foxes

Ursidae

All Species

Bears*

Procyonidae

All Species

Raccoons and* Relatives

Mustelidae

All Species

Weasels, Badgers,* Skunks and Otters

(except Mustela Putorius furo)

Ferret

Viverridae

All Species

Civets, Genets, Lingsangs, Mongooses, and Fossas

Herpestidae

All Species

Mongooses*

Hyaenidae

All Species

Hyenas*

Protelidae

Proteles cristatus

Aardwolf*

Felidae

All Species

Cats*

Chiroptera

All Species

Bats*

Lagomorpha

Lepridae

Leppus Europeaeous

European hare

Oryctolagus cuniculus

European rabbit

Rodentia

Sciuridae

Cynomys spp.

Prairie dogs

**MOLLUSKS:**

Order

Family

Genus/Species

Common Name

Veneroida

Dreissenidae

Dreissena Polymorpha

Zebra mussel

**REPTILES:**

Order

Family

Genus/Species

Common Name

Squamata

Alligatoridae

All Species

Alligators, Caimans*

Colubridae

Boiga irregularis

Brown tree snake*

Crocodylidae

All Species

Crocodiles*

Gavialidae

All Species

Gavials*

B. Temporary possession permit for certain animals. Notwithstanding the
permitting requirements of subsection A, a person, company or corporation
possessing any nonnative (exotic) animal, designated with an asterisk (*) in
subsection A, prior to July 1, 1992, must declare such possession in writing
to the department by January 1, 1993. This written declaration shall serve as
a permit for possession only, is not transferable, and must be renewed every
five years. This written declaration must include species name, common name,
number of individuals, date or dates acquired, sex (if possible), estimated
age, height or length, and other characteristics such as bands and band
numbers, tattoos, registration numbers, coloration, and specific markings.
Possession transfer will require a new permit according to the requirements of
this subsection.

C. Exception for certain monk parakeets. A permit is not required for monk
parakeets (quakers) that have been captive bred and are closed-banded.

D. Exception for parts or products. A permit is not required for parts or
products of those nonnative (exotic) animals listed in subsection A that may
be used in the manufacture of products or used in scientific research,
provided that such parts or products be packaged outside the Commonwealth by
any person, company, or corporation duly licensed by the state in which the
parts originate. Such packages may be transported into the Commonwealth,
consistent with other state laws and regulations, so long as the original
package remains unbroken, unopened and intact until its point of destination
is reached. Documentation concerning the type and cost of the animal parts
ordered, the purpose and date of the order, point and date of shipping, and
date of receiving shall be kept by the person, business or institution
ordering such nonnative (exotic) animal parts. Such documentation shall be
open to inspection by a representative of the Department of Game and Inland
Fisheries.

E. Exception for certain mammals. Nonnative (exotic) mammals listed in
subsection A that are imported or possessed by dealers, exhibitors,
transporters, and researchers who are licensed or registered by the United
States Department of Agriculture under the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. §§
2131 et seq.) will be deemed to be permitted pursuant to this section,
provided that those individuals wanting to import such animals notify the
department 24 hours prior to importation with a list of animals to be
imported, a schedule of dates and locations where those animals will be housed
while in the Commonwealth, and a copy of the current license or licenses or
registration or registrations from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and
further provided that such animals shall not be liberated within the
Commonwealth.

F. Exception for prairie dogs. The effective date of listing of prairie dogs
under subsection A of this section shall be January 1, 1998. Prairie dogs
possessed in captivity in Virginia on December 31, 1997, may be maintained in
captivity until the animals' deaths, but they may not be sold on or after
January 1, 1998, without a permit.

G. All other nonnative (exotic) animals. All other nonnative (exotic) animals
not listed in subsection A of this section may be possessed and sold;
provided, that such animals shall be subject to all applicable local, state,
and federal laws and regulations, including those that apply to
threatened/endangered species, and further provided, that such animals shall
not be liberated within the Commonwealth.